# How to breastfeed your newborn.
Breastfeeding a newborn sometimes comes easily, but it's also perfectly normal for you and your baby to need time to get the hang of it.
You may feel excited about breastfeeding your newborn – and you may also feel a little intimidated. Maybe you've heard stories of moms who didn't produce enough milk or who struggled with painful nipples or other problems. Or maybe you're just unsure how to go about it.
Some moms and babies coordinate breastfeeding easily and without a hitch. But for many others, it can be tricky, especially at first. Breastfeeding is natural, but it's also a skill that can take practice – for you and your baby. (Sucking is a reflex babies have even before birth, but it may take some time for a newborn to learn to coordinate their breathing, sucking, and swallowing to breastfeed successfully.)
There's a lot to know about breastfeeding, but there are many resources to help you. Once you and your baby learn the basics and iron out any problems, it's likely to feel natural.
## How to breastfeed a newborn.
Babies are often most alert right after birth and then get sleepy, so the first hour after delivery is a great time to start breastfeeding.
At the beginning, your body will produce small amounts of a special milk called colostrum that will help protect your baby from infection. (Your baby's tummy is very tiny, so they only need small amounts to fill up. As your baby's tummy grows, your milk will change and you'll produce more of it.)
When you're ready to breastfeed:
 - Arrange yourselves. Get in a comfortable breastfeeding position. You may feel best sitting up, or you may want to breastfeed in a side lying or laid-back position. Turn your baby's whole body toward you, chest to chest. Make sure your baby's body is lined up – imagine a straight line from their ear to shoulder to hip – so they don't have to turn their head.
 - Hold your breast. Use one hand (or arm) to hold your baby in position, and the other to hold your breast. You can help your baby get a deep latch by making a "nipple sandwich" for them. Compress your breast using your hand – with your thumb by your baby's nose and your fingers underneath your breast, by their chin. Hold your breast far enough back that your fingers aren't in your baby's way.
 - Get your baby to open wide. Tickle your baby's upper lip with your nipple, and, when they open their mouth wide, aim your nipple toward the roof of their mouth and quickly bring your baby to your breast (not your breast to your baby), chin first. Don't panic if your newborn seems to have trouble finding or staying on your nipple. Breastfeeding requires patience and lots of practice.
 - Make sure your baby's latch is good. This is often the trickiest part of breastfeeding, and it may take some practice. (See below for tips.) It may even be painful at first, while your baby is figuring it out. Once your baby starts sucking, you should feel just a gentle tug. If you continue to experience pain when breastfeeding, it may be that your baby's latch isn't quite right. If you're not sure your baby is latching on correctly, have a lactation consultant watch.
## How can I tell if my baby has a good latch?.
If your baby doesn't have a good latch, it can result in them not getting enough milk and your nipples becoming sore and cracked. Things to check:
 - Your baby's nose should almost touch your breast but not press against it.
 - Your baby's mouth should cover not just the nipple but as much of the areola (the darker part surrounding it) as possible. Your nipple should end up far back inside your baby's mouth. If your baby sucks on just your nipples, they won't compress the glands that secrete milk, and your nipples may hurt.
 - Your baby's lips should be flanged out (turned out), not curled under. You won't be able to see their bottom lip, but you can feel it.
 - Listen for your baby's swallows or watch to see their jaw working as they nurse.
 - Check that your nipple remains the same shape before and after feeding. If your nipple is pinched or pressed, then the latch is probably shallow.
Pay attention to how your breasts feel when your baby latches on. If latch-on hurts, break the suction (by inserting your little finger between your baby's gums and your breast) and try again. Once your baby latches on properly, they'll do the rest. Learn more about how to get a good latch.
## How often to breastfeed a newborn.
The more you nurse, the more milk you'll produce. And because newborns have tiny stomachs, they need to eat frequently. Nursing eight to 12 times every 24 hours is on target.
Rather than nursing according to a rigid schedule, it's important to nurse your newborn "on demand" or whenever they show early signs of hunger, such as increased alertness or activity, mouthing, or rooting around for your nipple. Crying is a late sign of hunger – ideally, you should start feeding your baby before they start crying. Babies can find it hard to settle in to nurse if they're too upset, no matter that they're hungry.
During the first few days, you may have to gently wake your baby to begin nursing, and they may fall asleep again mid-feeding. Keeping your baby skin-to-skin with you during breastfeeding will help keep them awake and active during feedings.
To make sure your baby's eating often enough, wake them up if it's been four hours since your last nursing session. Your baby's doctor will want you to keep track of your baby's wet and poopy diapers for 4 or more days – this will help determine that your baby is getting enough nourishment. They'll also weigh your baby regularly to make sure that they're gaining weight properly.
### .
## Tips for breastfeeding a newborn.
There's plenty of good advice to help you succeed at breastfeeding. Here are some of the best tips from experts:
### Get comfortable.
Since feedings will take up a lot of time, especially in the newborn months, pick a cozy spot for nursing. Use this time to bond with your little one.
Hold your baby in a position that won't leave your arms and back sore. The position you choose really depends on what's comfortable for you.
A nursing pillow can be a big help in supporting your baby. Many moms also find a footstool helps them get comfy when they're sitting in a chair. Whether you're sitting or lying down, don't start the feeding until you and your baby are comfortable because you'll be in that position for a while.
### Eat well.
A healthy breastfeeding diet is all you need while you're nursing. Although you can produce milk for your baby even if your nutrition isn't up to par, eating a well-balanced diet will ensure that the quantity and quality of your milk is all it can be. (Plus, it will help you feel your best.) You don't need to count calories but, as a general guideline, most women who are breastfeeding will need about 450 to 500 calories more than moms who aren't.
Many moms feel extra hungry while breastfeeding, which makes sense – your body is working around the clock to make breast milk for your baby. Eating small meals with healthy snacks in between (the way you may have done during pregnancy) is a good way to keep your hunger in check and your energy level up.
Your practitioner may recommend that you keep taking your prenatal multivitamin while breastfeeding, to make sure you get all the nutrients you need.
By the way, most nursing babies don't mind if Mom indulges in spicy foods. In fact, some experts believe that babies enjoy some variety. No foods are problematic for all babies, so there's no need to restrict what you eat right away. But if your baby seems more gassy or irritable every time you eat a particular food (dairy products, for example), try eliminating the suspect food for a while to see if you notice an improvement.
### Rest.
Nap when you can during the day, because your baby will keep you busy breastfeeding overnight.
Whenever you can, get help from family and friends with errands, cooking, and other household tasks so that you can rest with your baby.
### Supplement your baby's diet.
Your baby's doctor will talk to you about giving your nursing baby vitamin D supplements. The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends breastfed and partially breastfed infants up to one year old be given 400 IU of vitamin D daily. That's because breast milk may not have enough of the vitamin for your baby. Vitamin D helps the body absorb calcium and phosphorus, which help build strong bones.
The doctor may also recommend that your baby take iron supplements beginning at four months of age. The AAP recommends 1 mg/kg per day of oral iron until your baby starts eating enough iron-containing foods.
### Stay hydrated.
Drink plenty of fluids throughout the day, and have a beverage handy when you sit down to breastfeed.
Use your thirst as a guideline. You're likely to be more thirsty when you're breastfeeding. If your urine is dark yellow, you need to drink more water. Eight to 12 glasses of water daily is a good guideline.
### Use both breasts.
Begin nursing on the breast your baby didn't feed from (or the one they didn't empty) the last time you nursed. (Tuck an extra nursing pad into your bra on that side as a reminder, if it helps.) Have your baby nurse on both sides at each feeding. The more frequently you nurse, the more you'll stimulate milk production. (See what to do if your baby prefers one breast over the other.)
### Limit caffeine and alcohol.
Don't overdo your caffeine consumption, because you'll pass the caffeine along to your baby in your breast milk, and it can accumulate in their system. (Experts recommend limiting your intake to no more than 300 mg per day, about the amount you'd get in a 12-ounce cup of coffee.)
You'll also want to limit drinking alcohol while you're breastfeeding, because the same amount of alcohol that enters your bloodstream makes it into your breast milk – and your baby can't process the alcohol as well as you can. Learn how alcohol can affect your breastfeeding baby.
### Choose breastfeeding-friendly birth control.
Talk with your healthcare provider about which birth control methods are best for breastfeeding women. Hormonal birth control may affect milk supply in some women. If that's the case for you, a non-hormonal option such as a copper intrauterine device (IUD) might be best.
## Breastfeeding problems you may encounter.
It's normal to feel overwhelmed by your baby's constant nursing and exhausted from lack of sleep. And you may have questions: Is my baby getting enough milk? Should breastfeeding hurt? How long should my baby nurse? Should I wake my baby if they fall asleep nursing?
Many women also face specific breastfeeding difficulties early on. Some of the most common breastfeeding problems you may encounter in the first six weeks include:
 - Engorgement (breasts that are excessively full and uncomfortable)
 - Sore and bleeding nipples
 - Mastitis (a breast infection)
 - Low milk supply
Don't suffer in silence. Call your healthcare provider or a lactation consultant if you're suffering from any of the above, if you're in pain, or if physical discomfort is getting in the way of nursing.
## Where to get help with breastfeeding.
Breastfeeding help and support is just a phone call (or a click) away. Places to contact:
 - Your doctor or midwife. Talk with them about any health concerns that may be getting in the way of successful breastfeeding. Ask them to put you in touch with a lactation consultant. You can also contact the hospital or birth center where you delivered, a postpartum doula, or your baby's doctor for a referral.
 - La Leche League InternationalOpens a new window, an organization that offers encouragement and support to women who want to breastfeed their babies, can send you information or put you in touch with a La Leche League chapter near you. You can reach the group's headquarters or get advice from its breastfeeding hotline by calling (800) 525-3243. If you attend local meetings, you can meet other new moms and get breastfeeding assistance.
 - International Lactation Consultant Association. For professional advice and encouragement, call an international board-certified lactation consultant (IBCLC). A lactation consultant can offer advice on how to breastfeed properly and give you hands-on help. To find one near you, call the International Lactation Consultant Association at (919) 861-5577 or use that association's online lactation consultant finderOpens a new window.
 - The National Women's Health and Breastfeeding HelplineOpens a new window provides answers to questions and breastfeeding support. Call them at 1-800-994-9662.
For support from other breastfeeding moms, visit the Breastfeeding support and help group in BabyCenter's Community.
Learn more:
 - Preparing to breastfeed
 - Breast milk storage
 - Breastfeeding tips and tricks
 - Benefits of breastfeeding


 # Preparing to breastfeed.
Your third trimester is the perfect time to get ready for nursing your baby! Start by learning about breastfeeding and finding a support group for nursing moms.
## How to prepare for breastfeeding.
If you're nearing the end of your pregnancy and planning to breastfeed your baby, there are certain things you can do now to help the process go smoothly.
Here's how to prepare for breastfeeding your newborn:
 - Do your research. Take the time to learn about breastfeeding basics. Knowing the benefits of breastfeeding and the initial challenges you might face can help you prepare for your baby's first few days of life. Check out books on breastfeeding, read our top breastfeeding tips, and spend some time on trusted websites, like La Leche LeagueOpens a new window.
 - Find a support group. Many hospitals and pediatricians' offices have a support group for breastfeeding moms. These meetings are meant to give new moms community as they learn the ups and downs of breastfeeding. If your healthcare provider doesn't have recommendations for breastfeeding support, check out the La Leche League databaseOpens a new window of breastfeeding support groups.
 - Enlist a lactation consultant. You may be connected with a lactation consultant through the hospital where you give birth or your baby's pediatrician's office. If not, you can find a certified lactation consultant through your insurance provider. These professionals can be invaluable during your baby's first several weeks of life, helping you monitor weight, troubleshoot latch issues, and address challenges that might arise as you and your baby learn to breastfeed.
 - Prepare to pump. Most moms will need to pump breast milk at least occasionally, and some moms will pump exclusively as a way to breastfeed their baby. Order your breast pump (or get one through your health insurance plan), and educate yourself on pumping and storing breast milk. If you'll be working outside your home, now is a good time to talk with your employer about where you can pump.
 - Talk with your partner about how they can support you as a breastfeeding mom. A lot of your time during the first months of your baby's life will be spent skin-to-skin, nursing your little one. Your partner might not be able to nurse your baby, but they can take on more housework, care for older children, and deliver water and snacks to you to make sure your needs are being met.
 - Get close right away.  Immediately after you give birth, place your baby skin-to-skin on your bare chest. (You can also do this after a C-section; just ask your medical staff for extra support to place your baby safely on your chest.) When babies are left undisturbed on Mom's bare chest, it wakens their feeding instincts.
 - Start breastfeeding in the first hour or two after you deliver your baby. Breastfeeding shortly after birth is associated with increased chances of breastfeeding success. Your baby may be sleepy at first but more awake the second day, and they may cluster feed at night. Follow their hunger cues and feed your baby on demand.
 - Enlist your friends and family for help. Breastfeeding will keep you busy, especially when your baby is a newborn. Friends and family can help by dropping by meals, spending time with your older kids, and helping out around the house. But limit visits if they interfere with breastfeeding and being skin-to-skin with your baby. If possible, ask your partner to be a gatekeeper at the door (greeting visitors, accepting food or gifts, and relaying information) so you can rest. 
## Do you need to prepare your nipples for breastfeeding?.
No. Your body is already preparing for breastfeeding. Thanks to hormonal changes in pregnancy, women are capable of producing breast milk by the end of their second trimester.
There's no reason to rub or scrub your nipples – this will only hurt you, and the pain could make breastfeeding difficult. Teaching your baby the right way to latch on to your breast from the beginning is the most effective way to prevent nipple fissures (cracked, sore, and bleeding nipples).
You may be noticing some small, pimple-like protrusions around your areola, the darker area around the nipple. These are called Montgomery's glands, and they secrete oil that fights bacteria, lubricates and softens the skin, and adjusts the pH balance. Avoid washing your nipples with soap, as it removes this beneficial oil and may dry the tissue.
Talk to a board-certified lactation consultant if you have flat, inverted, or dimpled nipples or anything else you're concerned about, such breast implants or a previous breast reduction surgery or lumpectomy. These issues usually don't mean that you can't breastfeed.
## Should you pump before birth?.
Generally, pumping breast milk before birth isn't recommended. Nipple stimulation with an electric pump may increase the risk of premature labor because it triggers the release of oxytocin, a hormone that can cause contractions. Additionally, there's no benefit to taking up pumping before your baby's born. It's not associated with increased milk production after birth.
There may be benefits to learning to hand express breast milkOpens a new window during pregnancy, though. It's a useful skill to have and could be helpful later to stimulate milk production and relieve engorgement.
Hand expressing colostrum, your baby's first food, isn't associated with increased risk of premature labor. With practice, you'll become more familiar with your breasts and be able to efficiently express a bit of milk.
## What do you need for breastfeeding?.
These products can make breastfeeding more comfortable and convenient:
Nursing bras are comfortable and provide the extra support your larger-than-usual breasts need. They come with flaps that you can easily undo at feeding time. It's best to wait until the last couple of weeks of pregnancy to shop for new nursing bras – this is when your breasts will be closest to their postpartum size. That said, once your milk comes in your breasts may grow another size or two! Keep that in mind when buying.
### .
Nursing tops and pajamas have convenient flaps that allow you to breastfeed easily and discreetly. Some nursing tanks are very supportive and can work as a bra and top in one. Note: In the early days of breastfeeding, you may just want to wear a comfy button-down shirt or robe so you can easily keep your baby skin-to-skin.
Nursing pillows are specially designed to support your baby while you're nursing, and can help you avoid straining your shoulders or neck during feeding sessions. They're more convenient – and better at keeping your baby in position – than regular pillows.
Nursing pads. It's normal for your breasts to leak while you're nursing, and another baby's cry or the sight of an infant can bring on a gush of milk when you least expect it. Disposable nursing pads (or reusable, washable ones) will keep you and your shirts nice and dry.
A breast pump. Even if you're not planning to pump regularly, a breast pump can be a useful tool – to help relieve engorgement, for example. Many health insurance plans cover breast pumps, so check with your insurer before buying a pump.
Bottles and nipples. If you'll be feeding your baby pumped breast milk, you'll need a selection of good bottles and nipples. Some babies prefer one brand over another, so it's a good idea to avoid stocking up until you learn which bottles and nipples your baby likes best.
Other breastfeeding accessories. Nipple cream or balm can help relieve sore nipples, and hot/cold gel packs can soothe swollen or sore breasts. Some moms also like to have a nursing cover for breastfeeding in public and breast milk storage bags for storing pumped milk.


# The 14 best breastfeeding tips and tricks.
You may have heard that breastfeeding is exhausting, painful, and full of challenges – and it can be. The good news is there's a lot you can do to improve your breastfeeding experience. The longer you breastfeed, the more benefits you and your baby enjoy. Plus, it gets a lot easier and more enjoyable over time. Before you start – or if you're struggling – check out these practical breastfeeding tips and tricks.
For guidance before and after your baby arrives, take a look these mom- and expert-approved breastfeeding tips. Breastfeeding is hard work, but these can make nursing your baby a little easier.
## Prepare ahead of time.
It takes a while to get the hang of nursing a new baby, but by preparing to breastfeed during pregnancy, you can set yourself up for a smoother experience.
During pregnancy, join a breastfeeding class or a breastfeeding support group. Read books and online articles to familiarize yourself with breastfeeding basics. When question arise, don't hesitate to reach out to friends and relatives with breastfeeding experience.
Consider connecting with La Leche League. This international organization shares breastfeeding information and hosts expert-led meetings to support and educate new parents. You can find resources in your zip code on their breastfeeding support search engineOpens a new window.
### .
## Stock up on breastfeeding supplies.
The little things can make a big difference when you're new to breastfeeding. You'll be spending a lot of time nursing, and certain products can help increase your comfort and make breastfeeding easier. These include:
 - A nursing pillow
 - A nursery glider or rocking chair
 - Nursing bras
 - Nursing pads
 - Nipple cream
 - A breast pump (your insurance may send you an electric breast pump, but you may prefer another model or a manual breast pump)
 - Bottles and nipples (if you'll pump breast milk)
## Set up a cozy nursing spot.
Whether you prefer your own chair or a spot on the couch, it's nice to have a designated place to settle into while you feed your little one. Grab a basket, bin, or tote bag and fill it with the essentials you'll want while you're nursing or pumping.
Here are a few ideas for what to keep handy:
 - A water bottle you can easily open with one hand
 - Nutritious snacks like nuts and dried fruit
 - Wireless earbuds and a cell-phone charger
 - Your breastfeeding pillow
 - Nursing pads and nipple cream
 - A few baby essentials like wipes, diapers, and a clean sleeper
## Know what's safe and what's not.
When you're breastfeeding, there aren't a lot of things that are off limits. Still, there are a few precautions you'll need to take to keep your nursing baby safe:
 - Don't eat edibles while breastfeeding, smoke weed, or use other recreational drugs.
 - Use caution when consuming alcohol while breastfeeding. Drink in moderation, and wait at least two hours after you finish a drink before nursing your baby.
 - Drinking coffee while breastfeeding is okay, but limit your caffeine intake to 300 milligrams each day (around 16 ounces of coffee).
 - Check in with your provider or pharmacist about using medications while breastfeeding.
 - Some herbs and herbal teas while breastfeeding may not be safe. Since herbs can be very potent, check with your provider before using them. Also, some herbs can decrease your milk supply.
 - You can eat most foods while breastfeeding, with the exception of high-mercury fish. It's unlikely that your baby would have an allergy or intolerance to foods you eat – but check with their doctor if you suspect your baby is reacting to something you're eating.
## Breastfeed right away.
Breastfeeding experts agree that nursing within an hour after birth is important. One of the main benefits to this is that when you snuggle your newborn close to start nursing, you're having skin-to-skin contact, which has a positive effect on breastfeeding.
Once your baby is born, ask to hold them skin-to-skin right away. Encourage your baby to latch on to your nipple and begin suckling as soon as possible, since this tells your body it's time to start making breast milk. Ask the nurses or the lactation consultant at your hospital or birth center to help you get started. 
The very first milk your body creates is called colostrum, a highly nutritious first food that's easy to digest and high in protein. Your baby won't drink much in the first few days, but the colostrum they get will strengthen their immune system, act as a gentle laxative, and provide all the nutrition your newborn needs.
Around your baby's third or fourth day of life, your milk will come in. Instead of small amounts of colostrum, you'll begin to produce higher volumes of mature breast milk.
### .
## Get a good latch.
Ensuring your baby has a good latch can be tricky, but it's essential to breastfeeding comfortably. A poor latch can cause you a lot of nipple pain and lead to cracked or bleeding nipples. It can also prevent your baby from getting enough milk.
After you give birth, ask for a visit from a lactation consultant or a nurse with lactation training. While they're with you, ask them to take a good look at your baby's latch and help you with any issues.
What makes for a good breastfeeding latch? Make sure your baby's mouth covers a large part of the underside of your areola (the pigmented skin around your nipple). Their lips should be flared out around your breast, instead of curled under. When latched, their tongue should cup the underside of your breast.
During the first several days of nursing, getting a good latch might take multiple tries. If your baby begins to nurse and the latch is painful or sloppy, break the latch by pushing one finger between their lips and your breast. Then, give it another go.
## Watch your baby, not the clock.
Feeding schedules can wait until your baby is older. While you're establishing your milk supply, and your baby is working on regaining weight lost after birth, breastfeed "on demand" – as often and as long as your baby wants to.
Milk production matches your baby's demand. When they breastfeed often and for extended periods of time, they're signaling your body to keep making more milk.
Your baby will tell you when it's time to eat by using hunger cues. They're subtle at first, but you'll soon recognize them. Some of the most common baby hunger cues include:
 - Smacking their lips; making sucking sounds or motions
 - Rooting (turning their head to search for your nipple)
 - Bringing their hands toward their mouth; sucking on their fists or fingers
 - Clenching their fists
Each baby is different, and the amount of time they'll spend nursing varies greatly. You can expect your newborn to nurse for 10 to 15 minutes on each breast, but many will spend more time nursing, especially in the beginning.
## Don't suffer in silence.
It's true that breastfeeding is often uncomfortable, and even painful, at first. Your nipples need time to adjust to breastfeeding and will feel extra sensitive during the first several days of nursing.
However, there's a limit to how much pain is considered normal or healthy. In fact, persistently sore nipples are a sign that you need to do some problem-solving.
Usually, the problem stems from a bad latch. When your baby doesn't get your nipple and areola far enough into their mouth, they'll suck on just the nipple – which will hurt and may lead to nipple fissures and other complications.
Speak up and let your provider, your baby's pediatrician, or a lactation consultant know if breastfeeding hurts. They may help you correct your baby's latch or try different nursing positions to make breastfeeding more comfortable.
If you're experiencing bleeding, blistering, broken skin, or scabbing, talk with a lactation consultant or healthcare provider right away. They can help you pinpoint the cause and recommend medication to heal your nipples.
Similarly, stay on top of breastfeeding problems like clogged milk ducts and engorgement. These annoying and uncomfortable issues can easily get worse and lead to mastitis, a painful inflammation of breast tissue.
## Try different positions.
Trying different breastfeeding positions is well worth the effort. With practice and some trial and error, you'll learn what's most comfortable and effective for you and your little one.
Changing positions can sometimes help you get a better latch, and if you're dealing with a clogged duct, a different position can target the clog and get milk flowing again.
Some common breastfeeding positions include:
 - The cradle hold: This is your classic breastfeeding position, and will likely be the first position a lactation consultant or nurse shows you. Place your baby on their side facing you, with their head resting in the crook of your arm on the side they'll be nursing on. Your opposite arm helps to support your baby and hold them close.
 - The cross-cradle hold: This position mimics the cradle hold closely, but your arms switch jobs. Reach your opposite arm further behind your baby and use that hand to support them from the base of their head.
 - The football hold: Tuck your little one under your arm with their nose at your breast and their torso and legs extending behind you. This hold takes a little practice and perfectly positioned pillows, but can provide a lot of relief for sore nipples.
 - Side-lying position: Lie down with your baby and put a pillow under your head (and perhaps another between your knees). Position your baby so their belly is facing you and use your top arm to pull their head in close to latch onto your breast.
## Be persistent.
Many moms are surprised when breastfeeding doesn't come naturally. However, challenges aren't a sign nursing isn't in the cards for you and your baby. It's common for breastfeeding moms to spend time troubleshooting, whether they're correcting a poor latch or working on boosting milk supply.
If you're having trouble, talk to a lactation consultant or your provider. Find someone who's well-versed in breastfeeding and has the knowledge and resources to help.
If you're consistently having nipple pain, they might point you to a nipple shield or check whether your baby is tongue-tied. If you're struggling with supply, they may suggest you begin pumping as a way to tell your body to make more milk. In some instances, moms turn to exclusive pumping as a way to continue to feed their baby breast milk using a bottle.
## But don't beat yourself up.
Fed is best. If you decide breastfeeding isn't working for you, that's okay. Don't give in to guilt.
There are many benefits to breastfeeding for any amount of time. So even if you're unable to continue exclusively breastfeeding after the first couple weeks or months, know that the time you nursed mattered.
This is true whether you discontinue breastfeeding earlier than you had planned, begin supplementing with formula, or choose to use combination feeding by mixing breast milk and formula feeding.
## Ask for help.
In the early weeks, you may feel like all you do is nurse. Don't hesitate to ask for help with everything else. Turn to your partner, friends, and family – and consider hiring a postpartum doula if possible.
Between feedings, hand over your baby so you can get a nap, take a walk, or hop in the shower. It's okay to ask for help so you can care for yourself, and these little breaks will better equip you to care for your baby.
Even if you're exclusively breastfeeding, you may want to introduce a bottle when your baby is three or four weeks old. This way, others can help with feedings.
## Maintain your milk supply.
You may not have any problems with low milk supply; many moms continue to nurse their baby for a year or more without any trouble with milk production. However, some moms do experience decreased milk supply, especially when they return to work.
If you suspect you're no longer making enough milk for your baby, there are several things you can do to increase your milk supply, including breastfeeding more, having lots of skin-to-skin contact with your baby, and learning how to power pump.
## Take care of yourself.
As a new mom, it's hard to prioritize your own needs. The new baby you're caring for requires a ton of time and attention, and your schedule has been turned upside-down.
Still, try to take good care of yourself, too. Getting plenty of rest and finding time for you (even if that's just a quick shower, walk, or quiet cup of tea) can help you manage your mental health and feel more patient on challenging days. Do your best to eat well and stay hydrated. And be sure to talk to your provider if you have any signs of postpartum depression or postpartum anxiety.


# Recognizing the signs of labor.
Early signs of labor can start days or even weeks before the big event. These early labor signs include your baby dropping, losing your mucus plug, and having Braxton Hicks contractions.
In late pregnancy, it's easy to wonder whether every symptom you're having is an early signs of labor. Are you having Braxton Hicks or "real" contractions? Is that your mucus plug or normal vaginal discharge?
While every woman's experience is different, learning the typical signs of labor can help you feel more prepared when it does happen. While in the movies women have two contractions and deliver a baby, in the real world labor is typically a longer and unmistakable process.
## What is labor?.
Labor is the process of delivering your baby – and your placenta – from your uterus through your vagina and into the world. Labor usually occurs sometime between 38 and 41 weeks of pregnancy.
Your body will go through different stages of labor during childbirth, and you'll experience a number of telltale signs of each stage.
The first stage, cervical dilation and effacement, is when your cervix thins and opens. This stage has two phases, the latent phase, when your cervix is slowly dilating from 0 to 6 cm, and the active phase, when stronger contractions dilate the cervix more rapidly from 6 cm to full dilation at 10 cm.
Once you're fully dilated, the second stage starts as your baby descends into the vaginal canal and is birthed. (You'll be pushing during this stage.)  The third stage starts with your baby's birth and ends with the delivery of the placenta.
## Early signs of labor.
In the final days or weeks before your due date, you may notice one or more signs that labor is near. Not all women experience all of these signs – again, this is very individual – but if you do feel like your baby has dropped lower, for example, or you have some mucousy discharge or more Braxton Hicks contractions than usual, you may be close to labor day!
Note: Before you get excited about labor starting, remember that many of these signs and symptoms can precede labor by weeks. Rather than predicting that labor is imminent, these can just be symptoms of being pregnant near your due date.
Still, here are some of the early signs that labor may be near:
### Lightening.
If this is your first pregnancy, you may feel what's known as lightening a few weeks before labor starts. Lightening means your baby has "dropped" and now rests lower in your pelvis.
When your baby drops, you might feel less pressure just below your ribcage, making it easier to catch your breath. If you experienced heartburn during pregnancy, it might now improve. (On the downside, you may need to pee more often because your baby's pressing on your bladder.)
If this isn't your first baby, however, lightening may not happen until labor begins.
### Loss of the mucus plug.
If your cervix begins to efface or dilate significantly as you get close to labor, you may pass your mucus plug – the small amount of thickened mucus that has collected within your cervical canal during your pregnancy. If you see mucus, it's likely a sign that you're dilating – but it can still be some time before labor begins.
The mucus plug may come out in a lump all at once or as an increased amount of clear, pink, or slightly bloody vaginal discharge over the course of several days – or even weeks. Without the other signs of labor noted below, you don't need to call your doctor or midwife if you pass your mucus plug.
### Bloody show.
You may have noticed more vaginal discharge during pregnancy, thanks to your body's increased estrogen. Normal, healthy discharge is usually creamy white or clear, but it may also be tinged brown, pink, or red. Other colors – such as yellow, green, or gray – may signal an infection or other problem.
When your cervix starts to soften, you may notice pink discharge or bright red blood. This is called "bloody show." Sometimes this happens as you lose your mucus plug (the mucus may be tinged with blood) but it can also happen independently. You may notice it a few days – or even weeks – before you go into labor, or you may notice it at the beginning of labor.
Having sex or a vaginal exam can also disturb the mucus in your cervix and result in some blood-tinged discharge or bleeding, even when labor isn't necessarily starting any time soon.
Call your provider if you have vaginal bleeding heavier than a period, consistent red bleeding that's not slowing, or bleeding in combination with abdominal pain.
### Cervical dilation and effacement.
In the days and weeks before delivery, changes in the connective tissue of your cervix make it soften and lead to dilation and effacement.
If you've given birth before, your cervix is more likely to dilate a centimeter or more before labor starts. Still, that's no guarantee that labor is imminent.
When you're at or near your due date, your doctor or midwife may do a vaginal exam during a prenatal visit to see whether your cervix has started the process of effacement and dilation. Whether you have this exam is up to you. Cervical exams can be uncomfortable, and they can't predict future labor timing. But exams can be helpful for planning an upcoming induction or for estimating how much time you'll have to get to the hospital if you have a history of fast labors.
### Braxton Hicks contractions.
You may have experienced Braxton Hicks contractions throughout your pregnancy. If you're having a Braxton Hicks contraction, you'll feel a tightening or squeezing of your uterus, lower abdominal area, or groin. Then it will relax. Unlike true labor contractions, Braxton Hicks contractions are irregular and usually not painful.
More frequent and intense Braxton Hicks contractions can signal that real contractions are coming soon – but not always.
### Nesting.
Many women report an urge to organize and clean things around the house in preparation for their baby's arrival. Whether this behavior is driven by hormones or cultural expectations is up for debate, but some studies have found that pregnant women engage in more nesting than non-pregnant women, and the amount of nesting they do increases as their pregnancy advances.
Not all women have this nesting instinct, but if you do, take advantage – just don't overdo it, because you want to be well rested for the big day.
### Diarrhea.
Is a bout of diarrhea your body's way of clearing the way for labor and delivery? Some people think so. But – while assertions abound that diarrhea means your labor will start in 24 to 48 hours – we have no good evidence that there's a link.
Throughout pregnancy, you may be more prone to diarrhea as hormones relax your muscles – including your uterus and rectum. On the other hand, for many women pregnancy results in constipation as these same hormones relax the gastrointestinal tract and slow the movement of food through it.
As labor begins, your body releases hormones called prostaglandins that tell your uterus to contract. Prostaglandins may also cause stool to move more quickly through your system.
If you have diarrhea, drink plenty of fluids to stay hydrated. If you have diarrhea and a fever or any other signs of illness, or if the diarrhea lasts more than a couple of days, call your doctor or midwife.
### Nausea.
Some women report feeling nauseated during labor and others say they were nauseated a day or two before going into labor. When labor begins, digestion slows or stops, and you may feel sick to your stomach. More often, nausea happens during active labor.
Nausea isn't uncommon, but let your doctor or midwife know if it persists or is new, with vomiting. Sometimes new nausea and vomiting at the end of pregnancy can be a sign of preeclampsia, a dangerous blood pressure disorder.
### .
## Signs of labor.
These are reliable signs that you're in real labor:
### Regular contractions.
Once you're having regular, persistent contractions, you're considered to be in labor.
When your uterus contracts, your abdomen feels tight or hard, and you have a sensation of cramping. When the uterus relaxes between contractions, the sensation dissipates. Labor contractions will grow stronger, longer, and more frequent as they cause your cervix to dilate. True labor contractions are too painful to talk through, and they may bring tears to your eyes.
Find out more about what contractions feel like according to moms.
You'll want to start timing your contractions – how far apart they are and how long they last. (Time contractions starting from the beginning of one until the beginning of the next.) Your doctor or midwife probably gave you directions about when to head to the hospital based on the timing of the contractions. If not, give them a call and ask.
### Back pain or pelvic pressure.
You may feel increased pressure in your pelvis as your baby continues to move down. Contractions can also cause a feeling of pressure, along with abdominal pain.
If you're having lower back pain along with contractions, it may signal that you're having back labor. The pain from back labor continues between contractions, though it may get stronger during contractions.
Back pain usually means that your baby's head is pressing against your lower back, though one theory suggests that the pain may be "referred" from your uterus to your lower back.
### Water breaking.
When the fluid-filled amniotic sac surrounding your baby ruptures, fluid leaks from your vagina. This is called rupture of membranes. It may come out in a large gush or a small trickle, or anything in between.
Labor usually follows soon after your water breaks – regular contractions often start before this, but in some cases, the water breaks first.
If your water breaks when you're full term but you're not in labor (not having contractions), it's called premature rupture of membranes (PROM).
If you don't start having contractions on your own within six to 24 hours of your water breaking, your provider will most likely recommend that labor be induced. That's because your baby is more likely to get an infection without the amniotic sac's protection against germs. Most providers will offer you an immediate induction but give you the option to postpone if you want to give labor a chance to start on its own.
If you're leaking amniotic fluid before 37 weeks, it's called preterm premature rupture of membranes (PPROM), and it may mean your baby will need to be delivered prematurely due to the increased risk of infection.
Regardless of contractions, if you're group B strep positive you'll need to start on antibiotics as soon as your water breaks to prevent an infection in your baby.
Whenever your water breaks, call your doctor or midwife. (Call them even if you think your water broke but aren't sure.)
## Signs of preterm labor.
If you start having regular contractions that cause your cervix to begin to open before you reach 37 weeks of pregnancy, you're in preterm labor. (It's also known as premature labor.)
It can be difficult to tell whether you're having preterm labor or not, because some of the symptoms (like Braxton Hicks and low back pain) may be things you've experienced throughout your pregnancy.
Still, call your doctor or midwife right away if you're having any of the following symptoms before 37 weeks:
 - More vaginal discharge than usual
 - A change in the type of discharge – if you're leaking watery fluid or your discharge becomes watery, mucus-like, or bloody (even if it's pink or just tinged with blood)
 - Any vaginal bleeding or spotting
 - Abdominal pain, menstrual-like cramping, or six or more contractions in one hour (even if they don't hurt)
 - More pressure in the pelvic area (a feeling that your baby is pushing down)
 - Low back pain, especially if it's dull or rhythmic, or you didn't previously have back pain
 - Your water breaks, either in a gush or a trickle
If you are – or might be – in preterm labor, your doctor or midwife may give you steroids to help your baby's lungs mature and to protect their brain. You may also receive medicine to stop or slow early contractions. Getting these medications early can improve outcomes for your baby, so be sure to call if you think you may be in preterm labor.
## Braxton Hicks vs contractions.
It can be hard to tell the difference between Braxton Hicks and "real" contractions at first. Use this chart to help figure out whether you're in true labor or false labor (in other words, just having Braxton Hicks contractions).
False labor contractions (Braxton Hicks)
True labor contractions
Timing
Are irregular and don't get closer together over time
Happen at regular intervals and get closer together over time
Length
Vary in length and don't get longer over time (fewer than 30 seconds or up to 2 minutes each)
Start to last longer with each contraction (about 30 to 70 seconds each)
Intensity
Are weak and don't get stronger with time (may be weak then strong, then weak again)
Grow stronger and more painful with each contraction
Location
Are felt at the front of the abdomen
May start in the back and move to the front, or radiate down into the thighs
Effect of moving or resting
Contractions stop when you change position, walk, or rest
Contractions continue even when you change position, walk, or rest
No matter how well informed you are about the signs of labor, it's normal to have a false alarm. Don't be embarrassed about calling your doctor or midwife – or showing up at the hospital – because you think you're in labor when you're not.
If you're assessed at the hospital and sent home because you're not in labor yet, your care team will give you specific instructions about changes to look for in the next few days or weeks and when to call or come back.
Learn more:
 - Pregnancy symptoms you should never ignore
 - Labor positions
 - Video: How your cervix dilates during labor


# Signs of labour.
## How will I know when I'm in labour?.
Every woman's experience of labour is different (Tommy's 2019). You may only be able to work out when labour truly started after you've been through it! However, changes that take place in pre-labour and early labour may cause tell-tale signs and symptoms that labour is imminent.

 - Persistent lower back pain or abdominal pain, with cramps that feel like period pain (NCT 2018, NHS 2017a, Tommy's 2019).
 - Painful contractions or tightenings  that may be irregular in strength and frequency, and may stop and start (Tommy's 2019).
 - Broken waters (ruptured membranes). Your membranes may rupture with a gush or a trickle of amniotic fluid (NHS 2017a). Although this can happen long before labour starts, you should still call your maternity unit to let them know (NCT 2018, NHS 2017a, Tommy's 2019).
 - A sticky, jelly-like mucus discharge, which may be tinged with blood (bloody show) (NHS 2017a, Tommy's 2019). This is the mucus plug that blocks the cervix during pregnancy (NHS 2017a, Tommy's 2019). If it comes out, labour could start soon, or in a few days. It's a sign that things are moving along (NHS 2017a).
 - An upset tummy (NHS 2017a, Tommy's 2017a, 2019) or loose bowels (Tommy's 2017a).
Learn more about what contractions feel like.
## Can I tell if labour is about to happen soon?.
Maybe. Some of the symptoms you may experience in late pregnancy are good signs that your body is starting to get ready to go into labour. 
 - Lightening, when your baby's head drops into an engaged position in your pelvis. You may be able to breathe more deeply and eat more, but you'll also need to wee more frequently, and walking may be more difficult (Brusie 2017, Murray and Hassall 2014).
 - Heavier vaginal discharge with more clear or yellow mucus (NHS 2018a).
 - More frequent and, possibly, noticeably more intense Braxton Hicks contractions (Jackson et al 2014, Murray and Hassall 2014).
 - Mood swings (Gross et al 2010).
 - A sudden urge to clean or bring order to your home (Anderson and Rutherford 2013)!
## What should I do in early labour?.
The early phase of the first stage of labour is when your cervix dilates to 4cm (Tommy's 2019). This can sometimes take up to a few days, and often feels similar to period pain (Tommy's 2019). The best thing to do during this time will depend on what time of day it is, what you like doing, and how you're feeling. It's safe for you to take paracetamol if you'd like to (NHS 2017a, Tommy's 2019). There isn't much evidence that paracetamol can help to relieve early labour pain (Othman et al 2012), but some women say they do find it helpful. Ibuprofen and aspirin aren't safe for your baby, so don't take them unless you've been advised to by your midwife or doctor (Tommy's 2017b). Keeping as calm and relaxed as possible can help you to cope with the contractions or tightenings (NCCWCH 2014). It will also help your body to release the hormone oxytocin, which you need for your labour to progress (NCT nd). This could mean watching your favourite film, going for a walk, pottering around at home, or asking a friend or relative over to keep you company. You could alternate between walking and resting, or try taking a warm bath or shower to ease any aches and pains (NCT 2018, NHS 2017a).

### .
## How will I know when I've moved into active labour?.
If you're planning to have your baby in a hospital or birth centre, the active phase of the first stage of labour is the time to go (NHS 2017b, WebMD 2017). This starts when your cervix is about 4cm dilated, and lasts until it's about 8cm dilated (WebMD 2017). It's also known as "established labour" (NCT 2018, Tommy's 2019).
While you're in active labour, listen to your body and watch out for how you're feeling. As labour intensifies, you're likely to talk less. You'll find holding a conversation during a contraction more difficult (Nightingale 2013). You may notice that you have to pause as each surge builds, leaning forward and rocking your pelvis to help you through it (Nightingale 2013). As your labour progresses, you may start to turn your awareness inward, focusing in on each contraction and using your breath to help you to cope (Nightingale 2013). You might start "sighing" out from the start of each contraction, or even making little moaning or humming noises (Nightingale 2013).

## When should I call my midwife?.
You've probably talked to your midwife about what to do when you think you're in active labour. But if you're not sure whether the time has come, don't be embarrassed to call. Midwives are used to getting calls from women who are uncertain if they're in early labour or active labour, and who need guidance (Tommy's 2019). It's part of their job. 
 - your contractions are coming at least every five minutes, and lasting for at least a minute each
 - you're having labour symptoms before you're 37 weeks pregnant
 - your baby's moving less than usual
 - your waters have broken
 - you're bleeding (NHS 2017a)
Your midwife will want to hear about what you've been experiencing, particularly how close together your contractions are (Tommy's 2019). She'll be able to tell a lot by the tone of your voice and how you respond to a contraction, so talking helps (NCT 2018). It's not always possible for a midwife to accurately judge whether active labour has started over the phone (Janssen et al 2009). If you're using hypnobirthing or deep relaxation you may sound as though you're in an earlier stage than you are (Finlayson et al 2015). So it's important to trust what your body is telling you as well as being guided by your midwife. If you're planning to have your baby in hospital or birth centre, you may not need to go in straight away. Instead, your midwife may give you some coping tips and advise you to stay at home until contractions become more frequent and stronger (NHS 2017a). Depending on what's available locally, she may arrange for a midwife to visit you at home, or ask you to come in so she can assess your labour (NCCWCH 2014).Trust your instincts on when you think it's the right time to leave the house or call in the midwife. This may mean ignoring pressure from your partner, mum, or whoever else is with you, until you feel it's the right time to go (Nolan 2011). If you're going to hospital or a birth centre, always phone before setting off (NHS 2017a), as your chosen unit may be busy. If that's the case, the staff may direct you to another unit if there's another one nearby (Which nd). It's a good idea to prepare for this possibility so that it's not such a big disappointment if it happens to you. 

## Can I have contractions and not be in labour?.
If you're having true contractions, which get progressively stronger, longer and more frequent, chances are you're in labour (Lowth 2017). But you may experience Braxton Hicks contractions (sometimes called "practice contractions") long before the big day (Tommy's 2017c).It can sometimes be easy to mistake Braxton Hicks contractions for the real thing (Tommy's 2017c), especially if you haven't had a baby before. One way to tell the difference, is that Braxton Hicks contractions often go away if you change position (Tommy's 2017c). So if you're sitting, try getting up and walking around, or vice-versa.If you're not sure whether you're having true contractions or Braxton Hicks, call your midwife (Tommy's 2017c). She may be able to tell just by asking you some questions, and listening to your tone of voice and breathing (NCT 2018). Or she may offer you an assessment – either at home or at the hospital or birth centre – to check whether labour has started (NCCWCH 2014).At the end of the day, you know your body best. If you have an uncomplicated pregnancy, staying at home until labour is well established may help you to have a better birth experience (Tommy's 2019). But if you're feeling concerned or distressed, don't hesitate to call your midwife and ask for an assessment (NCCWCH 2014, Tommy's 2019). 

You might also like:
 - Get tips on coping with early labour pain at home.
 - Find out what to pack in your hospital bag.
 - Should you wax or shave before giving birth? Watch our video to find out.
 - If you've had a baby before, find out what to expect this time around.


# The stages of labor and delivery.
Here's what happens during the three stages of labor, how long each stage lasts, what each feels like.
## What are the stages of labor?.
There are three stages of labor. Here's what they include:
Stage 1: Early labor contractions, active labor, and full dilation of the cervix
Stage 2: Pushing and delivering the baby
Stage 3: Delivering the placenta
The first stage of labor is the longest. A lot happens in this stage – so much that it's divided into three phases:
 - Early labor: Your cervix gradually thins out and opens to about 6 centimeters (cm) by the end of this phase.
 - Active labor: Your cervix begins to dilate more rapidly and opens up further to 10 cm. Contractions are longer, stronger, and closer together.
 - Transition: During the last part of active labor, contractions are even longer, stronger, and closer together. This can be the most difficult part of your entire labor.
Every pregnancy is different, and there's wide variation in the length of labor. For first-time moms, labor often takes between 12 and 18 hours. For women who've already had a vaginal birth, labor may last 8 to 10 hours. These are just estimates: For some women labor lasts much longer, while for others it's over much sooner.
## First stage of labor.
The first stage of labor is the longest stage, especially if you're giving birth for the first time. Early labor usually takes the longest amount of time and transition the shortest.
### Early labor.
You may have had signs of early labor – such as more frequent Braxton Hicks contractions, loss of your mucus plug, bloody show, and even some cervical dilation and effacement – for days or even weeks now. Or maybe not! Either way, once you start having regular, persistent contractions, you're in labor.

What to expect:
 - Contractions start. You'll start having contractions at relatively regular intervals. Early labor contractions are sometimes hard to distinguish from "false labor" (that is, irregular Braxton Hicks contractions). True labor contractions get closer together as time goes on and are more regular than Braxton Hicks contractions. If you aren't sure whether you're in true labor, see whether you can hold a complete conversation. If you have to stop, especially mid-sentence, to breathe through contractions, you're probably moving into early labor.
 - Contractions get longer, stronger, and closer together. Eventually they'll be coming every four to five minutes and lasting 40 to 60 seconds each. (Some women have much more frequent contractions during this phase, but the contractions will still tend to be relatively mild and last no more than a minute.) Early labor ends when your cervix is about 6 cm dilated and your progress starts to accelerate.
 - You may feel some pain. If your labor is typical, your early contractions will be mild enough for you to talk through them and putter around the house, or even doze off between them. But as your labor progresses, your contractions will become painful.
 - You may feel pelvic pressure or back pain as your baby moves down. If you have lower back pain with your contractions, you may be having back labor.
 - You may see a mucousy vaginal discharge. This may be tinged with blood – the so-called bloody show. This is perfectly normal, but if you see more than a tinge of blood, be sure to call your doctor or midwife.
 - Your water may break. Call your provider if your water breaks. It may feel like a slow trickle of liquid or a strong gush.
What to do:
 - Time contractions periodically. Don't become a slave to the stopwatch just yet – it's stressful and exhausting to record every contraction over the many long hours of labor, and it isn't necessary. Instead, you may want to time your contractions periodically to get a sense of what's going on. In most cases, your contractions will let you know in no uncertain terms when it's time to take them more seriously.
 - Rest. It's important to do your best to stay rested, since you may have a long day (or night) ahead of you. If you're tired, try to doze off between contractions.
 - Relax. If you're feeling anxious, you may want to try some relaxation exercises, take a warm bath, or do something to distract yourself a bit – like watching a movie.
 - Drink plenty of fluids to keep well hydrated. And don't forget to urinate often, even if you don't feel the urge. A full bladder may make it more difficult for your uterus to contract efficiently, and an empty bladder leaves more room for your baby to descend.

### Active labor.
There's no doubt now that your baby is on the way. Your doctor or midwife may have given you instructions about when to go to the hospital or birth center, but usually once you have regular, painful contractions (lasting about 60 seconds each) every four to five minutes for an hour or more, it's time to grab your hospital bag and head out.
What to expect:
 - Contractions become intense. Active labor is when things really get rolling. Your contractions become increasingly intense – more regular, longer, and stronger – and you'll no longer be able to talk through them.
 - Contractions get more frequent. In most cases, contractions eventually happen every 2 1/2 to 3 minutes, although some women never have them more often than every 5 minutes, even during transition.
 - Cervix opens wider. Your cervix dilates more quickly. (The last part of active labor, when the cervix dilates fully from 8 to 10 cm, is called transition, which is described in the next section.)
 - Your baby may begin to descend toward the end of active labor, although they might have started to descend earlier, or might not start until the next stage.
 - Nausea and vomiting. This is fairly common now, sometimes from epidural anesthesia causing the blood pressure to drop, and sometimes from stimulation of nerves that cause vomiting.
What to do:
 - Get pain relief if you need it. Most women opt for pain medication, such as an epidural, at some point during the active labor phase.
 - Try relaxation techniques. Many pain-management and relaxation techniques used in natural childbirth – such as breathing exercises and visualization – can help you during labor, whether or not you're planning to receive medication.
 - Lean on your support person. Your partner, a friend or family member, or a hired doula can be a huge help now. You'll probably appreciate lots of gentle encouragement.
 - Move. It may feel good to walk, but you'll probably want to stop and lean against something (or someone) during each contraction. You should be able to move around the room freely after your caregiver evaluates you, as long as there are no complications.
 - Sit or lie down on your side. If you're tired, try sitting in a rocking chair or lying in bed on your left side.
 - Get a massage. This might be a good time to ask your birth partner or doula for a massage to help ease labor pain.
 - Take a warm shower or bath if you have access to a tub and your water hasn't broken. Even if your water has broken, a shower is probably okay, as the risk of infection is low. (Don't take a bath if your water has broken.)

### Transition.
The last part of active labor is called the transition period because it marks the shift to the second stage of labor. Your contractions are at their strongest, and your cervix completely opens up so that your baby can pass through.
What to expect:
 - A fully dilated cervix. Your cervix dilates from 8 cm to a full 10 cm.
 - Very strong contractions. This is the most intense part of labor. Contractions are usually very strong, coming every 2 1/2 to 3 minutes or so and lasting a minute or more. You may start shaking and shivering.
 - Pressure on your rectum. By the time your cervix is fully dilated and transition is over, your baby has usually descended somewhat into your pelvis. This is when you might begin to feel rectal pressure, as if you have to move your bowels.
 - Discharge. There's often a lot of bloody discharge.
 - Nausea. You may feel nauseated or even vomit.
 - An urge to push. Some babies descend earlier and the mom feels the urge to push before she's fully dilated. Other babies descend later and the mom reaches full dilation without feeling pressure. If you've had an epidural, the pressure you'll feel will depend on the type and amount of medication you're getting and how low your baby is in your pelvis.
## Second stage of labor.
Once your cervix is fully dilated, the second stage of labor begins: pushing and the final descent and birth of your baby.
The entire second stage can last anywhere from a few minutes to several hours.
What to expect:
 - More spaced-out contractions. At the beginning of the second stage, your contractions may be a little further apart, giving you the chance for a much-needed rest between them.
 - Less intensity as pushing begins. Many women find their contractions in the second stage easier to handle than the contractions in active labor because bearing down offers some relief. Others don't like the sensation of pushing.
 - The urge to push. As your uterus contracts, it exerts pressure on your baby, moving them down the birth canal. If your baby is very low in your pelvis, you may feel an urge to push early in the second stage (and sometimes even before). But if your baby's still relatively high, you probably won't have this sensation right away.
 - You might want to take it slow. If everything's going well, you might want to take it slowly and let your uterus do the work until you feel the urge to push. Waiting a while may leave you less exhausted in the end.
 - You may be instructed to push. In many hospitals it's routine to coach women to push with each contraction in an effort to speed up the baby's descent. Let your caregiver know if you'd prefer to wait until you feel a spontaneous urge to bear down. This practice, known as laboring down, has been shown to be as effective as coached pushing, although delivery may take a little longer.
 - Epidurals can reduce the urge to push. If you have an epidural, the loss of sensation can blunt the urge to push, so you may not feel it until your baby's head has descended quite a bit. You may need explicit directions to help you push effectively.
With each contraction, the force of your uterus – combined with the force of your abdominal muscles if you're actively pushing – exerts pressure on your baby to continue to move down the birth canal. The descent may be rapid. Or, especially if this is your first baby, the descent may be gradual.
When a contraction is over and your uterus is relaxed, your baby's head will recede slightly in a "two steps forward, one step back" kind of progression.
Learn more about how to push during labor.

### Crowning.
What to expect:
 - Your baby's scalp will appear. After a time, your perineum (the tissue between your vagina and anus) will begin to bulge with each push, and before long your baby's scalp will become visible – a very exciting moment and a sign that the end is in sight. You can ask for a mirror to get that first glimpse of your baby, or you may want to reach down and touch the top of their head.
 - A powerful pushing urge. Now the urge to push becomes even stronger. With each contraction, more and more of your baby's head becomes visible. The pressure of their head on your perineum feels very intense, and you may notice a strong burning or stinging sensation as your tissue begins to stretch. This is called "the ring of fire," and it lasts just a few minutes.
 - Instructions to slow down or pant. At some point, your caregiver may ask you to push more gently or to stop pushing altogether so your baby's head has a chance to gradually stretch out your vaginal opening and perineum. A slow, controlled delivery can help prevent perineal tearing. By now, the urge to push may be so overwhelming that you'll be coached to blow or pant during contractions to help counter it. Sometimes, gently coughing instead of pushing can result in a slower, easier descent of your baby's head.
 - The whole head appears. Your baby's head continues to advance with each push until it crowns – that's when the widest part of their head is finally visible. The excitement in the room will grow as your baby's face begins to appear: their forehead, their nose, their mouth, and, finally, their chin.
 - Provider removes any blockages. After your baby's head emerges, your doctor or midwife may suction their mouth and nose and will feel around their neck for the umbilical cord. If the cord is around your baby's neck, your caregiver will either slip it over their head or, if need be, clamp and cut it.
 - The body emerges. Your baby's head then turns to the side as their shoulders rotate inside your pelvis to get into position for their exit. With the next contraction, you'll be coached to push as their shoulders emerge, one at a time, followed by their body.



## Third stage of labor.
Minutes after giving birth, your uterus begins to contract again. The first few contractions usually separate the placenta from your uterine wall.
When your caregiver sees signs of separation, they may ask you to gently push to help expel the placenta. This is usually one short push that's not at all difficult or painful. On average, the third stage of labor lasts just five or six minutes, with 90 percent of placentas delivered by 15 minutes from the birth of your baby.
If the placenta is still attached 30 minutes after birth (or sooner if there's heavy bleeding), your provider might need to take action to assist in its delivery. This might mean giving you a drug to help your uterus contract, massaging the top of the uterus to encourage placental separation, or gently tugging on the umbilical cord.
In the meantime, nurses and doctors will be caring for your baby:
 - They need to be dried off with a towel and kept warm.
 - Your doctor or midwife may quickly suction your baby's mouth and nasal passages if they seem to have a lot of mucus.
 - If there are no complications, they'll be lifted onto your bare belly so you can touch, kiss, and simply marvel at them. Skin-to-skin contact will keep your baby nice and toasty, and they'll be covered with a warm blanket – and perhaps given their first hat – to prevent heat loss.
 - Your caregiver will clamp the umbilical cord in two places and then cut between the two clamps – or your partner can do the honors.
You may feel a wide range of emotions now: euphoria, awe, pride, disbelief, excitement (to name a few), and, of course, intense relief that it's almost over. Exhausted as you may be, you'll also probably feel a burst of energy.


## What happens after you give birth.
 - Your uterus contracts. After you deliver the placenta, your uterus should contract and get very firm. You'll be able to feel the top of it in your belly, around the level of your navel. Your caregiver, and later your nurse, will periodically check to see that your uterus remains firm, and massage it if it isn't. This is important because the contraction of the uterus helps cut off and collapse the open blood vessels at the site where the placenta was attached. If your uterus doesn't contract properly, you may suffer from a postpartum hemorrhage as you continue to bleed profusely from those vessels.
 - You can try breastfeeding. If you're planning to breastfeed, start now if you can. Not all babies are eager to nurse in the minutes after birth, but try holding your baby's lips close to your breast for a little while. Most babies will eventually begin to nurse in the first hour or so after birth if given the chance. Early nursing is good for your baby. What's more, nursing triggers the release of oxytocin, the same hormone that causes contractions, which helps your uterus stay firm and contracted.
 - You may receive oxytocin or other treatments. You may be given oxytocin to help your uterus contract. (Many providers routinely give it to all women at this point). If you're bleeding excessively, you'll be treated for that as well.
 - Contractions will subside. Your contractions at this point are relatively mild. If this is your first baby, you may feel only a few contractions after you've delivered the placenta. If you've had a baby before, you may continue to feel occasional contractions for the next day or two. These so-called afterbirth pains can feel like strong menstrual cramps. If they bother you, ask for pain medication such as ibuprofen, which is very effective against this crampy pain and safe for you to take, even if you're breastfeeding.
 - You may also have the chills or feel very shaky. Postpartum chills are perfectly normal and won't last long. Don't hesitate to ask for a warm blanket if you need one.
 - Your caregiver will examine the placenta to make sure it's all there. Then they'll check you thoroughly to spot any tears in your perineum that need to be stitched.
 - If you tore or had an episiotomy, you'll get an injection of a local anesthetic before being sutured.
 - If you had an epidural, an anesthesiologist or nurse anesthetist will come by and remove the catheter from your back. This takes just a second and doesn't hurt.
Unless your baby needs special care, you'll spend some quiet time together. You and your partner or other loved ones can share this special time as you get acquainted with your new little miracle.
Learn more:
 - Moms describe what labor feels like
 - What happens to your baby right after birth
 - Tips for labor coaches
 - Delayed cord clamping


# Diet for a healthy pregnancy.

## Should I eat differently now I'm pregnant?.
 That depends on what you were eating before! If you already eat healthily, you may only need to make a few tweaks to your daily diet.  But if you've been living on ready meals or takeaways, or you have a crisps or chocolate habit, it might be time for a nutritional makeover. 
## What does a healthy pregnancy diet include?.
Eating a healthy pregnancy diet means you'll get all the nutrients you and your developing baby need.  You'll need to include in your daily meals a variety of foods from these main groups: 
## Should I take any vitamin supplements?.
Yes, the NHS recommends that you take 400 micrograms (mcg) of folic acid every day for the first 12 weeks of your pregnancy. This is to protect your baby against brain and spinal defects (neural tube defects), such as spina bifida.  You may need to take a higher daily dose of folic acid (5mg) if: If you have sickle-cell disease or thalassaemia, you are more likely to have anaemia during pregnancy. So your doctor may also recommend a higher dose of folic acid to help prevent and treat anaemia. The Department of Health and Social Care also advises you to take 10mcg of vitamin D a day throughout your pregnancy. It can be hard to get enough vitamin D from food and from sunlight year-round in the UK. If you live in England, Wales or Northern Ireland and claim certain benefits or have a low income, you may be eligible for a scheme called Healthy StartOpens a new window. You will receive a card that can be exchanged for healthy foods and pregnancy vitamins. You're also eligible if you're under 18 and pregnant. There is a similar scheme called Best Start FoodsOpens a new window in Scotland.  As long as you're eating a healthy, balanced diet, you shouldn't need to take a multivitamin supplement. If you want to take a multivitamin, make sure it's made specifically for pregnant women.  It's worth getting guidance from your doctor or midwife before buying extra supplements. Some over-the-counter multivitamins may contain retinol, the type of vitamin A that's found in liver, that can be toxic to unborn babies. It's easy to get safe, plant-based, vitamin A from your diet by eating: Your body needs more iron while you're pregnant, particularly after 32 weeks, when you need 7mg a day. That's more than five times as much as you needed before pregnancy, and explains why iron-deficiency anaemia is very common in pregnancy. Even so, you can get enough by eating plenty of iron-rich foods and shouldn't need to take iron supplements. Red meat, eggs, beans and pulses, leafy green vegetables, wholemeal bread, dried fruit, nuts and fortified cereal are all good sources of iron. You'll only need to take an iron supplement if your midwife or doctor advises you to. Your midwife will check your blood for signs of iron-deficiency anaemia. If you're worried that you may be anaemic, speak to your midwife or doctor. Many people have low levels of iodine in their diet. Iodine is a mineral that's essential for your baby's brain development. Dairy foods, white fish, and cooked prawns, are a good source of iodine. You don't need to take an iodine supplement, just do your best to include foods with iodine in your meals.  Talk to your GP or midwife about special supplements that you may need if you:
## Do I need to eat more calories now I’m pregnant?.
You don’t need extra calories for the first six months of pregnancy. Your body is cleverly adapted to cope with the extra demands of pregnancy, and to process enough nutrients to benefit your baby. Your metabolism steps up to get the balance right between nourishing you, and nourishing your baby. For the last three months of your pregnancy, you only need about 200 extra calories a day to help your baby grow. A 200-calorie snack would be: It's normal for your appetite to fluctuate throughout your pregnancy. In the first few weeks of pregnancy, your appetite may fall away dramatically and you may not feel like eating proper meals, especially if you have nausea or sickness. Bland, starchy foods such as plain crackers may be all you can manage. If you suffer from heartburn or a full feeling after eating you may find it easier to have smaller, more frequent meals, instead of breakfast, lunch and dinner. 
## Are there any foods and drinks I shouldn’t have during pregnancy?.
Yes, the following may be unsafe for you or your baby: Some research has suggested that eating starchy foods that have been over-cooked until they're brown and crispy may be associated with low birth weight. This is due to a natural chemical called acrylamide that's formed as foods such as potatoes and bread are fried, baked, roasted, or grilled at high temperatures. More research is needed to be sure if acrylamide from food poses a risk to your unborn baby. However, it's easy to reduce acrylamide in your diet, so you may think it's worth doing: Store potatoes somewhere dark, cool and dry, but not in the fridge. Putting them in the fridge can increase the amount of sugar they hold, which could lead to higher levels of acrylamide when you bake, roast or fry them.
## Is it safe to go on a diet during pregnancy?.
Dieting during pregnancy could harm you and your developing baby. Some diets can leave you low on iron, folic acid, and other important vitamins and minerals.  Remember, weight gain is a positive sign that you’re having a healthy pregnancy. As long as you're eating fresh, wholesome foods and gaining weight, just relax. You're supposed to be getting bigger!  If you were overweight before you became pregnant, ask your GP or midwife for more advice about managing your weight during pregnancy. 
## How much weight will I gain in pregnancy?.
It's hard to say, as it depends on lots of things, including how heavy you were before you became pregnant. The average pregnancy weight gain is between 10kg and 12.5kg (22lb to 26lb). You'll put on most weight in your second and third trimesters. Your growing baby, the placenta, and amniotic fluid, make up a lot of your pregnancy weight gain. You're also hoarding more fluid to boost your blood system, and you're laying down fat to help your body make breastmilk for your newborn. During the middle part of your pregnancy, your appetite may be the same as before you were pregnant, or slightly increased. Towards the end of your pregnancy, your appetite will probably increase.  The best approach is to eat a balance of foods and try to do some activity every day. That way you’ll gain weight at a steady, healthy rate as your baby grows.
## Can I still have occasional treats during pregnancy?.
You don't have to give up all your favourite foods just because you're pregnant. But try to limit foods that are high in fat, salt and sugar. Healthy snacks are a good way to keep up your energy levels, especially if you can only manage small meals.  Instead of a packet of crisps or a bowl of ice cream, try eating something healthier such as beans on toast, a piece of fresh fruit, or a plain yoghurt. But don't feel guilty if you're tempted by the occasional biscuit. To make healthy eating easier, check out our trimester-by-trimester pregnancy meal planners, plus our guide to eating more fruit and veg.


# Pregnancy nutrients you need to help your baby grow.
When you're pregnant, it's essential to get the vitamins and minerals you need to support your body and your baby.
## Nutritional needs during pregnancy.
Your nutritional needs increase during pregnancy to support your growing baby and the hard work your body is doing to maintain your pregnancy. Your baby gets all their nutritional needs met through what you eat, so doing your best to have a healthy, well-balanced diet is more important than ever.
You can meet your daily requirement for most essential vitamins and minerals by eating healthy pregnancy meals and snacks made from nutritious and delicious foods. (See out list of what to eat when pregnant for ideas.)
But the recommended amount for some nutrients, such as folic acid and iron, is too high to be covered by diet alone. Your prenatal vitamin or other vitamin supplements can help you make up the difference. (Always talk to your doctor or midwife before taking any supplements in addition to your prenatal vitamin.)
Our list of pregnancy nutrients below gives information on how much of each nutrient you need each day, whether you're likely to need a supplement, and the benefits for your baby. We also list some of the best foods that include these nutrients. To learn more, and get more ideas for including these nutrients in your pregnancy diet, follow the links to our more in-depth articles.
## Most important nutrients during pregnancy.
According to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, the following vitamins and minerals are key during pregnancy. Additionally, research shows that omega-3 fatty acids are important for your baby's brain and eye development.
### Calcium.
Daily amount during pregnancy: 1,300 mg for women ages 18 and younger, and 1,000 mg for women ages 19 to 50.
Do you need a calcium supplement? The best way to get enough calcium is through a well-balanced diet and from your prenatal vitamin. If you think you aren't getting the recommended daily amount, talk to your healthcare provider about possibly adding a separate calcium supplement.
Benefits to your baby: Calcium helps to grow strong bones and teeth, a healthy heart, nerves, and muscles. Also, it contributes to the development of normal heart rhythm and blood clotting.
Some food sources of calcium:
 - 8 ounces calcium-fortified orange juice: 349 mg
 - 8 ounces plain, low-fat yogurt: 415 mg
 - 8 ounces nonfat milk: 299 mg
 - 8 ounces calcium-fortified soy milk: 299 mg
Learn more about calcium in your pregnancy diet.
### Iron.
Daily amount during pregnancy: 27 mg
Do you need an iron supplement? You may need an iron supplement – your provider will recommend one if so. You need a lot more iron during pregnancy, and it can be difficult to meet this goal through your diet and prenatal vitamin alone.
Note: There are two forms of iron: heme and non-heme. Heme iron is found only in animal sources and is easier for your body to absorb. Non-heme iron is found in plants, iron-fortified foods, and supplements.
Benefits to your baby: Iron is essential for making hemoglobin, the protein in red blood cells that carries oxygen to other cells. It also builds cartilage and other connective tissue.
Some food sources of iron:
 - 8 ounces lentils, cooked: 6.6 mg non-heme iron
 - 8 ounces prune juice: 3.0 mg non-heme iron
 - 3 ounces lean beef, chuck: 2.2 mg heme iron
 - 3 ounces canned light tuna: 1.3 mg heme iron
Learn more about iron in your pregnancy diet.
### Iodine.
Daily amount during pregnancy: 220 mcg
Do you need an iodine supplement? Iodine is found in many foods and prenatal vitamins (as well as iodized table salt), so you probably won't need to take a supplement.
Benefits to your baby: Iodine regulates metabolism and helps the brain, skeleton, and nervous system develop properly.
Some food sources of iodine:
 - 3 ounces cod, baked: 158 mcg
 - 8 ounces nonfat milk: 85 mcg
 - 1.5 grams iodized table salt: 76 mcg
 - one large egg, hard boiled: 26 mcg
Learn more about iodine in your pregnancy diet.
### Choline.
Daily amount during pregnancy: 450 mg
Do you need a choline supplement? You may be able to get enough choline by eating a varied diet, but many pregnant women don't get enough from diet alone and may need a supplement. Ask your provider whether you need a prenatal vitamin with choline (most prenatal vitamins don't include it) or a choline supplement to meet your daily requirement during pregnancy.
Benefits to your baby: Choline supports healthy brain and spinal cord development, and some studies suggest it may help prevent neural tube defects.
Some food sources of choline:
 - one large egg, hard boiled: 147 mg
 - 3 ounces top round beef, braised: 117 mg
 - 3 ounces chicken breast, roasted: 72 mg
 - 4 ounces broccoli, cooked: 31 mg
Learn more about choline in your pregnancy diet.
### Vitamin A.
Daily amount during pregnancy: 750 mcg RAE (retinol activity equivalents) for women ages 18 and younger, 770 mcg RAE for women ages 19 and older
Do you need a vitamin A supplement? Probably not. Most people get plenty from their diet, and prenatal vitamins usually contain vitamin A. Read the label on your prenatal vitamin to make sure you're not getting more than the recommended amount. Too much preformed vitamin A can cause birth defects and liver toxicity.
Benefits to your baby: Vitamin A is important for the development of organs, bones, and eyes as well as the circulatory, respiratory, and central nervous systems.
Some food sources of vitamin A:
 - one sweet potato, baked in skin: 1,4031 mcg RAE
 - 4 ounces frozen spinach, boiled: 573 mcg RAE
 - 4 ounces carrots, raw: 459 mcg RAE
 - 8 ounces vanilla soft serve ice cream: 278 mcg RAE
Learn more about vitamin A in your pregnancy diet.
### Vitamin C.
Daily amount during pregnancy: 80 mg for women ages 18 and younger, 85 mg for women ages 19 and older
Do you need a vitamin C supplement? No. Most people get plenty from their diet, and prenatal vitamins usually contain vitamin C.
Benefits to your baby: Vitamin C is essential for making collagen, a structural protein that's a component of cartilage, tendons, bones, and skin. It also helps build healthy gums, teeth, and bones.
Some food sources of vitamin C:
 - 6 ounces orange juice: 93 mg
 - one medium kiwi: 64 mg
 - 4 ounces green bell pepper, raw: 60 mg
 - 4 ounces broccoli, cooked: 51 mg
Learn more about vitamin C in your pregnancy diet.
### Vitamin D.
Daily amount during pregnancy: 600 IU (15 mcg) or more
Do you need a vitamin D supplement? Maybe. The amount required during pregnancy is a topic of debate, so you may want to ask your provider whether they think your prenatal vitamin and diet provide enough vitamin D.
Benefits to your baby: Vitamin D helps build your baby's bones and teeth.
Some food sources of vitamin D:
 - 3 ounces farmed rainbow trout, cooked: 654 IU (16.2 mcg)
 - 3 ounces cooked salmon (sockeye): 570 IU (14.2 mcg)
 - 8 ounces two-percent milk, fortified with vitamin D: 120 IU (2.9 mcg)
 - one large scrambled egg: 44 IU (1.1 mcg)
Learn more about vitamin D in your pregnancy diet.
### Vitamin B6.
Daily amount during pregnancy: 1.9 mg
Do you need a vitamin B6 supplement? No. Most people get plenty from their diet, and prenatal vitamins usually contain at least 100 percent of the recommended amount of vitamin B6.
Benefits to your baby: Vitamin B6 helps your baby metabolize protein and carbohydrates and is vital for your baby's developing brain and nervous system.
Some food sources of vitamin B6:
 - 8 ounces chickpeas, canned: 1.1 mg
 - 3 ounces fresh yellowfin tuna, cooked: 0.9 mg
 - 3 ounces chicken breast, roasted: 0.5 mg
 - one medium banana: 0.4 mg
Learn more about vitamin B6 in your pregnancy diet.
### Vitamin B12.
Daily amount during pregnancy: 2.6 mcg
Do you need a vitamin B12 supplement? You may if you're a vegan or vegetarian during pregnancy, you don't eat B12-fortified plant foods daily, and your prenatal vitamin doesn't include vitamin B12.
Benefits to your baby: Vitamin B12 is important for your baby's developing spinal cord and brain. It also helps with formation of red blood cells and DNA.
Some food sources of vitamin B12:
 - 3 ounces Atlantic salmon, cooked: 2.6 mcg
 - 3 ounces ground beef, 85-percent lean, pan browned: 2.4 mcg
 - 8 ounces 2-percent milk: 1.3 mcg
 - 1 serving breakfast cereal fortified with 25 percent of the daily value for vitamin B12: 0.6 mcg
Learn more about vitamin B12 in your pregnancy diet.
### Folic acid.
Daily amount during pregnancy: at least 600 mcg
Do you need a folic acid supplement? You need a prenatal vitamin or folic acid supplement to meet your daily requirement during pregnancy because it can be hard to get all the folic acid you need from food alone.
Benefits to your baby: Folic acid helps prevent neural tube defects, may reduce the risk of other birth defects, and is critical for producing DNA (the building block of cells).
Some food sources of folic acid:
 - 4 ounces spinach, boiled: 131 mcg
 - 4 spears asparagus, boiled: 89 mcg
 - 1/2 cup avocado: 59 mcg
 - 4 ounces kidney beans, canned: 46 mcg
Learn more about folic acid in your pregnancy diet.
### DHA (docosahexaenoic acid – an omega-3 fatty acid).
Daily amount during pregnancy: At least 200 mg
Do you need a DHA supplement? If low-mercury fish isn't a regular part of your diet or your prenatal vitamin doesn't have at least 200 mg of DHA, you could take fish oil or another separate omega-3 supplement that includes the recommended amount of DHA.
Benefits to your baby: DHA is important for the development of your baby's brain and eyes.
Some food sources of DHA:
 - 3 ounces farmed Atlantic salmon, cooked: 1,240 mg
 - 3 ounces wild rainbow trout, cooked: 440 mg
 - 3 ounces shrimp, cooked: 120 mg
 - 3 ounces tilapia, cooked: 110 mg
Learn more about DHA in your pregnancy diet.
## Other essential nutrients for pregnancy.
### Chromium.
Daily amount during pregnancy: 29 mcg for women ages 18 and younger, 30 mcg for women ages 19 to 50
Do you need a chromium supplement? You don't need to take chromium supplements because it's found in many foods and in many prenatal vitamins. Talk to your provider if you're concerned that you may have a chromium deficiency.
Benefits to your baby: Chromium promotes the building of protein in your baby's growing tissues.
Some food sources of chromium:
 - 8 ounces grape juice: 7.5 mcg
 - 3 ounces ham: 3.6 mcg
 - one whole wheat English muffin: 3.6 mcg
 - 1 cup orange juice: 2.2 mcg
Learn more about chromium in your pregnancy diet.
### Copper.
Daily amount during pregnancy: 1,000 mcg for women ages 18 and younger, 1,300 mcg for women ages 19 and older
Do you need a copper supplement? If you eat a healthy, varied diet, you'll probably get enough copper and won't need a supplement. A good prenatal vitamin also usually includes an adequate amount of copper. (Check product labels.)
Benefits to your baby: Copper helps to form the heart, blood vessels, and skeletal and nervous systems.
Some food sources of copper:
 - 1 medium potato with skin, cooked: 675 mcg
 - 1 ounce cashew nuts, dry roasted: 629 mcg
 - 3 ounces Dungeness crab, cooked: 624 mcg
 - 1 ounce dark chocolate, 75 to 85 percent cacao solids: 501 mcg
Learn more about copper in your pregnancy diet.
### Magnesium.
Daily amount during pregnancy: 400 mg for women ages 18 and younger, 350 mg for women ages 19 to 30, 360 mg for women ages 31 to 50
Do you need a magnesium supplement? Probably not. You're most likely getting enough if you eat a healthy, varied diet. If you're worried you're falling short, look for a prenatal vitamin with magnesium.
Benefits to your baby: Magnesium helps build strong bones and teeth, and research suggests it may help prevent preterm labor and other pregnancy complications.
Some food sources of magnesium:
 - 1 ounce pumpkin seeds, roasted: 156 mg
 - 1 ounce chia seeds: 111 mg
 - 1 ounce almonds, dry roasted: 80 mg
 - 4 ounces spinach, boiled: 78 mg
Learn more about magnesium in your pregnancy diet.
### Manganese.
Daily amount during pregnancy: 2 mg
Do you need a manganese supplement? Probably not. You're most likely getting enough if you eat a healthy, varied diet. Most prenatal vitamins do not include manganese.
Benefits to your baby: Manganese helps form bones and cartilage, helps protect cells from damage, and activates enzymes that help metabolize carbohydrates, cholesterol, and amino acids.
Some food sources of manganese:
 - 1 ounce pecans, dry roasted: 1.1 mg
 - 4 ounces medium-grain brown rice, cooked: 1.1 mg
 - 4 ounces spinach, boiled: 0.8 mg
 - 1/2 cup oatmeal, cooked: 0.7 mg
Learn more about manganese in your pregnancy diet.
### Pantothenic acid (vitamin B5).
Daily amount during pregnancy: 6 mg
Do you need a pantothenic acid supplement? Probably not. You most likely get enough if you eat a healthy, varied diet. Plus, most prenatal vitamins include pantothenic acid.
Benefits to your baby: B5 is essential for the production of red blood cells and hormones, plus it helps synthesize cholesterol and metabolize carbohydrates and fats for energy.
Some food sources of pantothenic acid:
 - 3 ounces skinless chicken breast, roasted: 1.3 mg
 - 3 ounces fresh bluefin tuna, cooked: 1.2 mg
 - 1/2 avocado: 1 mg
 - 8 ounces two-percent milk: 0.9 mg
Learn more about pantothenic acid in your pregnancy diet.
### Phosphorus.
Daily amount during pregnancy: 1,250 mg for women ages 18 and younger, 700 mg for women ages 19 and older
Do you need a phosphorus supplement? No. You'll get plenty of phosphorus if you eat a healthy, varied diet. Most prenatal vitamins don't contain phosphorus.
Benefits to your baby: Phosphorus helps build strong bones and develops blood clotting, kidney function, and normal heart rhythm.
Some food sources of phosphorus:
 - 6 ounces plain low-fat yogurt: 245 mg
 - 8 ounces two-percent milk: 226 mg
 - 4 ounces lentils, boiled: 178 mg
 - 1 ounce cashew nuts, dry roasted: 139 mg
Learn more about phosphorus in your pregnancy diet.
### Potassium.
Daily amount during pregnancy: 2,600 mcg for women ages 18 and younger, 2,900 mcg for women ages 19 and older
Do you need a potassium supplement? No. You'll probably get plenty of potassium if you eat a healthy, varied diet. Most prenatal vitamins don't contain potassium.
Benefits to your baby: Potassium helps maintain the proper balance of fluids and electrolytes in the body and aids muscle contractions and nerve function.
Some food sources of potassium:
 - 8 ounces cooked lentils: 731 mg
 - one medium baked potato without skin: 610 mg
 - 8 ounces orange juice: 496 mg
 - 1 medium banana: 422 mg
Learn more about potassium in your pregnancy diet.
### Riboflavin (vitamin B2).
Daily amount during pregnancy: 1.4 mg
Do you need a riboflavin supplement? Probably not. A healthy, varied diet should provide all the riboflavin you need. If you're worried about falling short, you can meet your daily requirement by taking a prenatal vitamin that contains riboflavin.
Benefits to your baby: Riboflavin (vitamin B2) promotes growth, good vision, and healthy skin, and is essential for your baby's bone, muscle, and nerve development. It may also help lower your risk of preeclampsia.
Some food sources of riboflavin
 - 8 ounces two-percent milk: 0.5 mg
 - 3 ounces beef tenderloin steak, boneless and grilled: 0.4 mg
 - 1 ounce almonds, dry roasted: 0.3 mg
 - 1 large egg, scrambled: 0.2 mg
Learn more about riboflavin in your pregnancy diet.
### Thiamin.
Daily amount during pregnancy: 1.4 mg
Do you need a thiamin supplement? Probably not. A healthy, varied diet should provide all the thiamin you need. If you're worried about falling short, you can meet your daily requirement by taking a prenatal vitamin that contains thiamin.
Benefits to your baby: Thiamin (vitamin B1) converts carbohydrates into energy and is essential for brain development. It also helps the heart, muscles, and nervous system function normally.
Some food sources of thiamin:
 - 1 serving fortified breakfast cereal: 1.2 mg
 - 3 ounces lean pork tenderloin: 0.8 mg
 - 1/2 cup black beans, cooked: 0.4 mg
 - one slice whole-wheat bread: 0.1 mg
Learn more about thiamin in your pregnancy diet.
### Zinc.
Daily amount during pregnancy: 12 mg for women ages 18 and younger, 11 mg for women ages 19 and older
Do you need a zinc supplement? Maybe. If you're not already getting enough in your diet, your prenatal vitamin will most likely provide all the zinc you need. But if you eat a mostly vegetarian diet, ask your provider if you also need a zinc supplement. It's harder to absorb the mineral from plant foods.
Benefits to your baby: Zinc aids cell growth and is crucial for the production and functioning of DNA.
Some food sources of zinc:
 - 3 ounces beef chuck roast, cooked: 7.0 mg
 - 3 ounces pork loin, cooked: 2.9 mg
 - 3 ounces chicken (dark meat), cooked: 2.4 mg
 - 8 ounces low-fat yogurt with fruit: 1.7 mg
 - 1 ounce dry-roasted cashews: 1.6 mg
Learn more about zinc in your pregnancy diet.


# What to eat when pregnant: The 12 best foods.
During pregnancy, good nutrition is more important than ever. To support a healthy pregnancy and your baby's development, include plenty of fruits, vegetables, whole grains, protein foods, and fat-free or low-fat dairy products in your pregnancy diet. Limit foods and beverages with lots of added sugars, saturated fat, and sodium. At every meal, make half your plate fruits and vegetables. And enjoy the best foods for pregnancy listed below!
## Best foods for pregnancy.
#### Eggs.
Eggs are a great source of protein, a crucial part of your pregnancy diet. The amino acids that make up protein are the building blocks of the cells in your body – and your baby's.
Eggs also contain more than a dozen vitamins and minerals, including choline. Choline – which is contained mostly in the yolks, so be sure to include them – helps your baby's brain and spinal cord develop properly, and helps prevent certain birth defects.
Combine eggs with whatever veggies and cheese you have on hand and you'll have the makings of a frittata. Leftovers – if there are any – are perfect for breakfast the next day.
Recipe: Frittata with chard, red onion, and feta
Recipe: Ratatouille with baked eggs
## Best foods for pregnancy.
#### Salmon.
Omega-3 fatty acids are crucial for your baby's brain development and may even boost your mood. Salmon is an exceptionally good source. Salmon also provides protein and vitamin D, which your baby needs for healthy bones and teeth.
Salmon (as well as herring, trout, anchovies, sardines, and shad) is a low-mercury option for the 8 to 12 ounces of seafood pregnant women are encouraged to eat each week. Find out more about eating fish safely during pregnancy.
Recipe: Pan-seared salmon with lentils and leeks
Recipe: Roasted salmon BLTs with herbed mayo
## Best foods for pregnancy.
#### Beans.
Beans – including legumes like lentils, peas, and peanuts – are a good source of protein and an excellent source of iron, folate, potassium, and magnesium. They're all important when you're pregnant.
Beans are also a great food for fiber, which can help prevent and relieve two common pregnancy discomforts: constipation and hemorrhoids.
Try tossing edamame (cooked soybeans, which are also an excellent source of essential fatty acids) in soups, salads, or stir-fries. Or snack on roasted edamame.
Recipe: Creamy white beans with sausage, broccolini, and bread crumbs (extra easy, thanks to canned beans)
Recipe: Tofu, broccoli, and sugar snap pea stir-fry
## Best foods for pregnancy.
#### Sweet potatoes.
Sweet potatoes get their orange color from carotenoids, plant pigments that are converted to vitamin A in our bodies. Your baby needs vitamin A for healthy bones, lungs, eyes, and skin development. This sweet veggie is also a very good source of vitamin C and manganese, and a good source of vitamin B6 (which may help with morning sickness), potassium, and fiber (especially if you keep the skin on).
Recipe: Curried chickpea and sweet potato turnovers
Recipe: Baked sweet potato fries (not just for kids!)
## Best foods for pregnancy.
#### Whole grains.
Whole grains are high in fiber and nutrients, including B vitamins, iron, folic acid (if fortified), magnesium, the antioxidant vitamin E, and the mineral selenium. They also contain phytonutrients, plant compounds that protect cells.
Trade white bread for whole grain, and sample different kinds of whole grains – from barley and buckwheat to oats and spelt – in your pregnancy diet.
Recipe: Chicken soup with farro and shiitake mushrooms
Recipe: Quinoa with shrimp, tomato, and avocado
## Best foods for pregnancy.
#### Walnuts.
Walnuts are one of the richest sources of plant-based omega-3s. They're also a good source of magnesium, fiber, and protein (which you need more of now that you're pregnant). Grab a handful of walnuts for an on-the-run snack, or toss some into a salad.
Check out other nuts, like almonds and pistachios, and nut and seed butters, like tahini, for similar benefits.
Recipe: Kale salad with dried fruit and toasted almonds
Video: How to make three perfect pregnancy meals
## Best foods for pregnancy.
#### Greek yogurt.
Greek yogurt typically has twice the protein of regular yogurt. Plus, it's a great source of probiotics, B vitamins, phosphorus, and calcium. Calcium helps keep your own bones strong and helps your baby develop a healthy skeleton.
Yogurt is a versatile breakfast ingredient and a wonderful addition to savory dishes too. Drinking milk is another good way to get calcium every day.
Recipe: Roasted cauliflower steaks with herbed yogurt (Note: Roasting this cruciferous vegetable has been known to win over cauliflower skeptics.)
Recipe: Honey-yogurt mustard dipping sauce (baked chicken tenders optional)
## Best foods for pregnancy.
#### Broccoli  and dark leafy greens.
Broccoli and dark leafy greens like spinach, kale, and Swiss chard are prenatal superfoods, loaded with vitamins and nutrients, including vitamins A, C, and K, as well as calcium, iron, and folate. They're also rich in antioxidants and fiber, which can ease constipation.
It's easy to up the amount of dark leafy greens in your diet. Just chop the greens coarsely and toss into smoothies, soups, omelets, or stir-fries.
These recipes offer healthy options for comfort food.
Recipe: Chicken and biscuits with Swiss chard
Recipe: Roasted butternut squash and kale lasagna
## Best foods for pregnancy.
#### Lean meats and poultry.
Meat is an excellent source of high-quality protein and a good source of B vitamins, iron, and zinc. Iron delivers oxygen to the cells in your body, and you need more of it during pregnancy.
Look for cuts that are around 95 to 98 percent fat-free.
Skip deli meats and hot dogs, though, unless they're heated until steaming hot. There's a small risk of infection from bacteria and parasites such as listeria, toxoplasma, or salmonella, which can be dangerous during pregnancy for you and your baby.
Recipe: Steak fajitas with peppers and onions, featuring flank steak, a lean and flavorful cut of beef
Recipe: Yellow curry with chicken, spinach, and butternut squash
Recipe: Grilled chicken with pumpkin-seed pesto
## Best foods for pregnancy.
#### Colorful fruits and veggies.
Eating plenty of green, red, orange, yellow, and purple fruits and vegetables helps you and your baby get a variety of nutrients. Each color group provides different vitamins and minerals. Bell peppers, for example, are high in vitamin C (which will help you absorb iron), while berries are bursting with antioxidants. Salads are an easy way to combine colorful fruits and veggies.
Considering buying organic produce but concerned about cost? Check the Dirty Dozen list of 12 fruits and vegetables that might be worth the extra money because they have the most pesticide residue.
Recipe: Steamed cod with spring veggies
Recipe: Zucchini noodles with sesame sauce
## Best foods for pregnancy.
#### Avocados.
Avocados are high in monounsaturated fatty acids (the healthy fats), which help build your baby's skin and brain. They're also high in vitamin K, antioxidants, and folate, which helps prevent certain birth defects.
Plagued by leg cramps? The potassium in avocados might help. Constipated? The fiber content is an antidote. Suffering from morning sickness? The vitamin B6 in avocados – which is also good for your baby's developing brain – can help ease nausea.
Avocados deliver a lot of flavor, creamy texture, and nutrition. Try spreading on whole-grain toast, or add to salads and smoothies.
Recipe: Carnitas with avocado and pico de gallo
Recipe: Black bean and sweet potato tacos with avocado
## Best foods for pregnancy.
#### Dried fruit.
Portable and nutrient dense, dried fruit offers a good occasional alternative to the fresh fruit that's so important in your pregnancy diet. Look for dried fruit without added sugar.
Depending on the dried fruit you choose, you'll boost your diet with a variety of vitamins and minerals (like iron), as well as antioxidants and fiber. Prunes, for example, are a tried-and-true remedy for the constipation that plagues so many pregnant women.
Recipe: Grilled pork tenderloin with barley and dried apricots
Recipe: Turkey meatballs with prunes
## Tips for a healthy pregnancy diet.
 - During pregnancy you need lots of protein and healthy fats, and more of certain vitamins and minerals (such as folic acid, iron, and calcium). See our list of nutrients you need to help your baby grow.
 - Eating well during pregnancy doesn't mean eating a lot more. If you start off at a healthy weight, you don't need additional calories during the first trimester. You'll need about 340 extra calories a day in the second trimester and about 450 extra calories a day in the third trimester. Learn more about pregnancy weight gain.
 - Some foods can be dangerous when you're pregnant. See what to avoid. (You'll also need to give up alcohol and limit caffeine during pregnancy.)
 - Healthy pregnancy snacks are where it's at! Choose snacks that help meet your nutritional needs, and cut back on processed foods, packaged foods, and sugary desserts.
 - If nausea, food aversions, heartburn, or indigestion make eating full-size meals uncomfortable, try eating small, frequent meals throughout the day. As your pregnancy progresses and your baby increasingly crowds your stomach and other digestive organs, you'll have less space in your body for big meals anyway.
 - Looking for more specifics? Create a pregnancy meal plan that will help you get exactly what you need from your pregnancy diet.


# Miscarriage: signs, symptoms and causes.
Miscarriage is the loss of a baby before you are 24 weeks pregnant. The most common signs of a miscarriage are bleeding and cramps. In early pregnancy, miscarriage is usually caused by the embryo not developing as it should, often because of problems with your baby’s chromosomes. Losing a pregnancy is upsetting and scary, but we can help answer your questions about risk factors and symptoms, and direct you to healthcare and support.
## What is a miscarriage?.
A miscarriage is the loss of a baby before 24 weeks of pregnancy. If the loss is experienced in the first 12 weeks of pregnancy, it is called an early miscarriage.  If the loss happens between 12 weeks and 24 weeks, it is called a late miscarriage.  If you think you're having a miscarriage, get medical help by calling your GP, midwife or your hospital's early pregnancy unit (EPU) straight away. You can also use the NHS 111 service online or by phone.  This is especially important if you’re Black or have Asian ethnicity because although your risk is small, sadly you’re more likely to have a miscarriage than a White mum. You’re also more likely to feel that your concerns aren’t taken seriously by health professionals. The following information may make you feel better prepared to reach out and make sure you’re heard.  Find out more about what to do and how to cope.
## What are the signs and symptoms of a miscarriage?.
The most obvious signs are vaginal bleeding and period-like cramping and tummy pain or low back pain. The bleeding could be light or heavy, and may contain blood clots. It may come and go for a few days.  But don’t forget that spotting in early pregnancy is very common and often turns out to be nothing to worry about. Spotting means losing very small amounts of blood. You may notice spots of blood or brown discharge on your underwear or when you use toilet tissue.  However, with any bleeding in pregnancy, you should always ring your doctor or midwife.  Sometimes, the levels of pregnancy hormones drop enough for you to notice that you're no longer feeling the symptoms of pregnancy, such as nausea, or your breasts are less tender. Remember, though, that it's natural for these pregnancy symptoms to become less noticeable or go away after 12 weeks or 13 weeks.  A late miscarriage is a particularly tough experience to go through. The signs of late miscarriage are heavy bleeding, and, sometimes, your waters breaking. This may be accompanied by intense labour-like pains, for which you need pain relief. There isn't always pain, though. Pregnancy loss because of a weak cervix may be painless. 
## How is a miscarriage diagnosed?.
Depending on your symptoms and stage of pregnancy, you may need to go to hospital, or you may be referred by your GP to an early pregnancy assessment unitOpens a new window for an ultrasound scan, to check that all is well. Sadly, some early miscarriages are discovered during a routine pregnancy scan because there’s been no obvious signs and symptoms. A scan may reveal an empty pregnancy sac, where the embryo should be. Sometimes, the embryo is there but has stopped developing. This is called a missed miscarriage or silent miscarriage. You may have had no idea that this has happened, in which case it will come as a terrible shock. Or you may have had some symptoms, giving you a fear that all was not well.  If your pregnancy sac can’t be seen, one scan in early pregnancy may not give all the answers. You may have an additional scan and further blood tests called Beta-hCG, which measure the amount of a hormone called human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) in your blood. You usually need two blood tests, two days apart, to see if your hormone levels are going up or down. In a healthy pregnancy, hormone levels rise quickly during the first trimester before levelling off at around 10 weeks.  If your hormone levels fall dramatically, it's likely you're having a miscarriage. If levels are increasing but you still have pain or bleeding, you'll need a further scan to check for other problems, such as ectopic pregnancy. You may need to have the tests again in one or two weeks if the cause of the bleeding is not clear.
## What causes miscarriage?.
Early pregnancy loss nearly always happens because the embryo is not developing as it should. Chromosome problems are thought to be the most common cause. These problems usually happen for no reason. Chromosomal problems can prevent a baby from developing. A baby usually has 23 chromosomes from their mother and 23 from their father. Variations may happen because there are too many or too few chromosomes, or because there are changes to a chromosome's structure. If this happens, the pregnancy will usually end at the embryonic stage.  Late miscarriages can happen for a number of reasons. Losses may happen because of developmental problems with the baby, or because the mum-to-be has a health condition. If you have several miscarriages in a row, you may be desperate to know why this is happening to you. In about half of cases, a cause cannot be found. You may be able to take comfort from knowing that around 7 out of 10 women who've had recurrent miscarriage without an obvious cause, go on to have a healthy baby with no intervention. Good medical care and support from the beginning of your pregnancy can help it to go well. 
## What are the chances of having a miscarriage?.
Sadly, early miscarriages are very common. Most miscarriages happen in the first 12 weeks of pregnancy.  It's common for a woman to have a miscarriage before she's realised she's pregnant. This early, a miscarriage can be mistaken for a late menstrual period. It's thought that over a quarter of all fertilised eggs are lost in the very earliest days of pregnancy, before a pregnancy test.  Up to about one in five confirmed pregnancies end in miscarriage. If that sounds high, remember that this is an estimated, overall figure. For example, the chances of having a miscarriage are lower when you're younger, and rise as you get older.  Late miscarriage is very rare. But when it happens, it is hard to bear. At this stage, for many parents and healthcare professionals too, the term "miscarriage" doesn’t capture the depth of sorrow they feel at losing their baby. Some women experience the anguish of recurrent miscarriage. This means that they have three or more miscarriages in a row. This is also rare; it happens to about one woman in 100 who is trying to conceive. 
## How do I know if I'm at risk of miscarriage? .
It's hard to say who's at risk. Most of the time, pregnancy loss happens for no reason and there is nothing that can be done to prevent it. This is especially the case with early miscarriage. The fact is that many women who have miscarriages are perfectly healthy. The miscarriage is not caused by anything that they have or haven't done, and most cases can’t be prevented.  Bearing all that in mind, we do know of some factors that  increase the risk of miscarriage:
### Your age.
Younger women, aged under 20, and older women, aged over 35 years, have higher rates of miscarriage than other age groups. How old the father of your baby is has an effect too. If they’re aged 40 or over, there's a higher chance of miscarriage no matter what your age is. The chance of miscarriage is highest where the woman is over 35 and the man is over 40. 
### Your ethnicity.
Unfortunately, you have a higher risk of experiencing pregnancy loss if you are Black or have Asian ethnicity. Experts believe that the reasons for this are complex.  It may be partly down to health conditions linked to an increased risk of pregnancy loss, which are more common if you’re from particular ethnic groups. For example, if you’re Black you’re more likely to be affected by fibroids and lupus. And if you’re from a South Asian background, you’re more likely to be affected by polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS).  However, this is not the full story. We know that wider social issues like not being able to easily access health and maternity care, and highly stressful work and home lives, play a part. They disproportionately affect more people in the UK who come from Black, Asian and minority ethnic backgrounds. 
### Your health.
If you have problems with your health, it's important to get the right care. It's particularly important to look after your health if you:  If they’re not managed well, these medical conditions can increase your chances of having a miscarriage.  Some medicines increase the chance of miscarriage, such as ibuprofen. Always check with your doctor, midwife or pharmacist before taking any medication during pregnancy, including over-the-counter ones.  The risk of miscarriage is also raised if you have a health condition that affects your blood's ability to clot. Sticky blood syndrome, also called antiphospholipid syndrome (APS), or Hughes syndrome, is known to be a cause of recurrent miscarriage. APS causes blood clots to form in blood vessels. You can have a blood test to tell if you have APS. It's often treatable. A similar, inherited blood-clotting condition called thrombophilia has also been known to cause miscarriage.  Some uterine (womb) abnormalities may make miscarriage more likely.  Any infection that makes you very unwell, such as flu, food poisoning, or  slapped cheek disease, may cause miscarriage if you catch it while you're pregnant. Some infections, such as syphilis are screened for in early pregnancy to help protect you and your baby. Conditions that affect your hormones, such as polycystic ovaries, are also linked to recurrent miscarriage and late pregnancy loss.  There is also some evidence linking the mix of friendly bacteria in your vagina with the risk of miscarriage. If you have plenty of the friendly bacteria lactobacilli, your risk of miscarriage is lower. An imbalance in your natural vaginal flora could result in bacterial vaginosis, which is also a risk factor. 
### Your lifestyle.
In most cases, miscarriages are not directly related to a mum-to-be's lifestyle. However, the following factors have a complex effect on health and can indirectly raise the risk of miscarriage:  Having too much caffeine regularly may also increase miscarriage risk. Bear in mind, though, that you can safely have 200mg caffeine (two mugs of instant coffee) a day.
### Your environment.
Some research has found a potential link between miscarriage and air pollution. This includes indoor air pollution, which is caused by many things such as how you heat your home, damp and chemicals in cleaning products.
##  Can having sex, or exercising, cause a miscarriage?.
There are plenty of myths about miscarriage, particularly when it comes to possible reasons why you've lost your baby. They can cause a great deal of anxiety or guilt if you believe them.  Having sex while you're pregnant does not cause miscarriage, as long as you're healthy and your pregnancy is going well. It's also safe to start or continue to exercise in healthy pregnancy. Swimming, brisk walking and pregnancy yoga are all good choices. Ask your doctor or midwife about suitable exercise if you're not sure where to start.
## I can't get over my miscarriage. Where can I get help?.
Coping with a miscarriage can be a heartbreaking and emotionally draining experience, no matter how early in pregnancy it happens. You will need to allow yourself a chance to grieve and recover. Your partner will need time to come to terms with the loss, too. Every person's experience of miscarriage is different, so give yourselves plenty of time to recover. In time, you will be able to look to the future again. When you're ready to think about trying again, it may be some comfort to know that most couples go on to have a healthy baby in the future. You may be able to get advice and support from your local hospital's counselling service, or you may wish to contact the Miscarriage AssociationOpens a new window for help. You may also find comfort from talking to others who've been through a similar experience in our warm, supportive BabyCentre communityOpens a new window.  Honouring the baby you've lost is one way to help you cope with your grief. Here are some ways to remember a baby you've lost in pregnancy. And check out our advice on understanding grief and  getting your strength back.


# Miscarriage: Signs, symptoms, and causes.
Miscarriage is very common – but that doesn't make it any less painful. Find out what to do if you might be having a miscarriage, and get support for coping after pregnancy loss.
## What is a miscarriage?.
Miscarriage is the loss of a pregnancy in the first 20 weeks. In medical language, the term "spontaneous abortion" is often used in place of miscarriage. When it happens in the first trimester, miscarriage is also called early pregnancy loss.
About 10 to 20 percent of known pregnancies end in miscarriage, and more than 80 percent of these losses happen before 12 weeks. The risk of miscarriage drops significantly as pregnancy progresses. In one study, researchers found a miscarriage rate of 9.4 percent at 6 weeks of pregnancy, 4.2 percent at 7 weeks, 1.5 percent at 8 weeks, 0.5 percent at 9 weeks and 0.7 percent at 10 weeks.
This doesn't include situations in which you lose a fertilized egg before a pregnancy becomes established. Studies have found that 30 to 50 percent of fertilized eggs are lost before or during the process of implantation – often so early that a woman goes on to get her period at about the expected time or up to a week late. This is called a chemical pregnancy.
## Signs of miscarriage.
If you have these signs of miscarriage, call your doctor or midwife right away so they can determine whether you have a problem that needs to be dealt with immediately:
 - Bleeding or spotting. Vaginal spotting or bleeding is usually the first sign of miscarriage. Keep in mind, though, that up to 1 in 4 pregnant women have some bleeding or spotting (finding spots of blood on your underpants or toilet tissue) in early pregnancy, and most of these pregnancies don't end in miscarriage.
 - Abdominal pain. Abdominal pain usually begins after you first have some bleeding. It may feel crampy or persistent, mild or sharp, or may feel more like low back pain or pelvic pressure.
### .
If you have both bleeding and pain, the chances of your pregnancy continuing are much lower. It's very important to be aware that vaginal bleeding, spotting, or pain in early pregnancy can also signal an ectopic or a molar pregnancy.
Also, if your blood is Rh-negative, you may need a shot of Rh immune globulin within two or three days after you first notice bleeding, unless the baby's father is Rh-negative as well.
Some miscarriages are first suspected during a routine prenatal visit, when the doctor or midwife can't hear the baby's heartbeat or notices that your uterus isn't growing as it should be. (Often the embryo or fetus stops developing a few weeks before you have symptoms like bleeding or cramping.)
If your practitioner suspects that you've had a miscarriage, they'll order an ultrasound to see what's going on in your uterus. They may also do a blood test.
## What causes miscarriage?.
There are a lot of myths about what causes miscarriage. But things like stress, exercising, having sex, and having used birth control pills before getting pregnant don't cause miscarriage. Neither does morning sickness, a fall, or a blow to the stomach. Don't blame yourself. Miscarriage usually happens because the fertilized embryo can't develop normally.
Between 50 and 70 percent of first-trimester miscarriages are thought to be random events caused by chromosomal abnormalities in the fertilized embryo. Most often, this means that the egg or sperm had the wrong number of chromosomes.
Sometimes a miscarriage is caused by problems that occur during the delicate process of early development. This would include an egg that doesn't implant properly in the uterus or an embryo with structural defects that prevent it from developing.
Since most healthcare practitioners won't do a full-scale workup of a healthy woman after a single miscarriage, it's usually impossible to tell why the pregnancy was lost. And even when a detailed evaluation is performed – after you've had two or three consecutive miscarriages, for instance – the cause still remains unknown half the time.
When the fertilized egg has chromosomal problems, you may end up with what's sometimes called a blighted ovum (now usually referred to in medical circles as an early pregnancy loss or missed abortion). In this case, the fertilized embryo implants in the uterus and the placenta and gestational sac begin to develop, but the resulting embryo either stops developing very early or doesn't form at all.
Because the placenta begins to secrete hormones, you'll get a positive pregnancy test and may have early pregnancy symptoms, but an ultrasound will show an empty gestational sac. In other cases, the embryo does develop for a little while but has abnormalities that make survival impossible, and development stops before the heart starts beating.
## Risk factors for miscarriage.
Though any woman can miscarry, some are more likely to miscarry than others. Here are some risk factors:
 - Age: Older women are more likely to conceive a baby with a chromosomal abnormality and to miscarry as a result. In fact, 40-year-olds are about twice as likely to miscarry as 20-year-olds. Your risk of miscarriage also rises with each child you bear.
 - A history of miscarriages: Women who have had two or more miscarriages in a row are more likely than other women to miscarry again.
 - Chronic diseases or disorders: Poorly controlled diabetes, autoimmune disorders (such as antiphospholipid syndrome or lupus), and hormonal disorders (such as polycystic ovary syndrome) are some of the conditions that could increase the risk of miscarriage.
 - Uterine or cervical problems: Having certain congenital uterine abnormalities, severe uterine adhesions (bands of scar tissue), or a weak or abnormally short cervix (known as cervical insufficiency) up the odds for a miscarriage. The link between uterine fibroids (a common, benign growth) and miscarriage is controversial, but most fibroids don't cause problems.
 - A history of birth defects or genetic problems: If you, your partner, or family members have a genetic abnormality, have had one identified in a previous pregnancy, or have given birth to a child with a birth defect, you're at higher risk for miscarriage.
 - Infections: Research has shown a somewhat higher risk for miscarriage if you have listeria, mumps, rubella, measles, cytomegalovirus, parvovirus, gonorrhea, HIV, and certain other infections.
 - Smoking, drinking, and using drugs: Smoking, drinking alcohol, and using drugs like cocaine and MDMA (ecstasy) during pregnancy can all increase your risk for miscarriage. Some studies show that high levels of caffeine consumption are linked to an increased risk of miscarriage.
 - Medications: Some medications have been linked to increased risk of miscarriage, so it's important to ask your caregiver about the safety of any medications you're taking, even while you're trying to conceive. This goes for prescription and over-the-counter drugs, including nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) like ibuprofen and aspirin.
 - Environmental toxins: Environmental factors that might increase your risk include lead; arsenic; some chemicals, like formaldehyde, benzene, and ethylene oxide; and large doses of radiation or anesthetic gases.
 - Paternal factors: Little is known about how the father's condition contributes to a couple's risk for miscarriage, though the risk does rise with the father's age. Researchers are studying the extent to which sperm could be damaged by environmental toxins but still manage to fertilize an egg. Some studies have found a greater risk of miscarriage when the father has been exposed to mercury, lead, and some industrial chemicals and pesticides.
 - Obesity: Some studies show a link between obesity and miscarriage.
 - Diagnostic procedures: There's a small increased risk of miscarriage after chorionic villus sampling and amniocentesis, which may be performed for diagnostic genetic testing.
 - Short time between pregnancies: Your risk of miscarriage is higher if you get pregnant within three months after giving birth.
## If you think you're having a miscarriage.
Call your doctor or midwife immediately if you ever notice unusual symptoms such as bleeding or cramping during pregnancy. Your practitioner will examine you to see if the bleeding is coming from your cervix and check your uterus. They may also do a blood test to check for the pregnancy hormone hCG and repeat it in two to three days to see if your levels are rising as they should be.
If you're having bleeding or cramping and your practitioner has even the slightest suspicion that you have an ectopic pregnancy, you'll have an ultrasound right away. If there's no sign of a problem but you continue to spot, you'll have another ultrasound in a couple of weeks.
At this point, if the sonographer sees an embryo with a normal heartbeat, you have a viable pregnancy and your risk of miscarrying is now much lower, but you'll need to have another ultrasound later if you continue to bleed. If the sonographer determines that the embryo is the appropriate size but there's no heartbeat, it may mean that the embryo didn't form or didn't survive.
If you're in your second trimester and an ultrasound shows your cervix is shortening or opening, your doctor may decide to perform a procedure called cerclage, in which they stitch your cervix closed in an attempt to prevent miscarriage or premature delivery. (This is assuming your baby appears normal on the ultrasound and you have no signs of an intrauterine infection.) Cerclage isn't without risk, and you may not meet the criteria for it.
Your caregiver may suggest that you not have sex while you're having bleeding or cramping. Sex doesn't cause miscarriage, but it's a good idea to abstain while you're having these symptoms.
## Treatment for miscarriage.
If you're miscarrying, discuss the pros and cons of treatment options with your caregiver. If there's no threat to your health, you may choose to wait and let the tissue pass on its own. (More than half of women spontaneously miscarry within a week of finding out that the pregnancy is no longer viable.)
If you wait for the tissue to pass on its own, you may have light bleeding and cramping for a few weeks. You can wear sanitary pads but no tampons during this time and take acetaminophen for the pain. The bleeding and cramping will likely get worse shortly before you pass the "products of conception" – that is, the placenta and the embryonic or fetal tissue, which will look grayish and may include blood clots.
Or you may decide to have a surgical procedure to remove the tissue. This is done by suction dilation and curettage (D&C).
You'll definitely need to have the tissue removed right away if you have any problems that make it unsafe to wait, such as significant bleeding or signs of infection. And your practitioner may recommend the procedure if this is your second or third miscarriage in a row, so the tissue can be tested for a genetic cause.
If you choose to have suction dilation and curettage, the procedure doesn't usually require an overnight stay unless you have complications. As with any surgery, you'll need to arrive with an empty stomach – no food or drink since the night before.
The doctor will insert a speculum into your vagina, clean your cervix and vagina with an antiseptic solution, and dilate your cervix with narrow metal rods (unless your cervix is already dilated from having passed some tissue). In most cases, you'll be given sedation through an IV and a local anesthetic to numb your cervix.
Then the doctor will pass a hollow plastic tube through your cervix and suction out the tissue from your uterus. Finally, they'll use a spoon-shaped instrument called a curette to gently scrape any remaining tissue from the walls of your uterus. The whole procedure may take about 15 to 20 minutes, though the tissue removal itself takes less than ten minutes.
Finally, if your blood is Rh-negative, you'll receive a shot of Rh immune globulin unless the baby's father is Rh-negative, too.
## What happens after a miscarriage.
Whether you pass the tissue on your own or have it removed, you'll have mild menstrual-like cramps afterward for up to a day or so and light bleeding for a week or two. Use pads instead of tampons and take ibuprofen or acetaminophen for the cramps. Avoid sex, swimming, and using vaginal medications for at least a couple of weeks and until your bleeding has stopped.
If you begin to bleed heavily (soaking a sanitary pad in an hour), have any signs of infection (such as fever, achiness, or foul-smelling vaginal discharge), or feel excessive pain, call your practitioner immediately or go to the emergency room. If your bleeding is heavy and you begin to feel weak, dizzy, or lightheaded, you may be going into shock. In this case, call 911 right away – don't wait to hear from your caregiver, and don't drive yourself to the ER.
## The chance of having another miscarriage.
It's understandable to be worried about the possibility of another miscarriage, but fertility experts don't consider a single early pregnancy loss to be a sign that there's anything wrong with you or your partner.
Some practitioners will order special blood and genetic tests to try to find out what's going on after two miscarriages in a row, particularly if you're 35 or older or you have certain medical conditions. Others will wait until you've had three consecutive losses. In certain situations, such as if you had a second-trimester miscarriage or an early-third-trimester premature birth from a weakened cervix, you might be referred to a high-risk specialist after a single loss so your pregnancy can be carefully managed.
## Conceiving again after a miscarriage.
You may have to wait a bit. Whether you miscarry spontaneously, with the help of medication, or have the tissue removed, you'll generally get your period again in four to six weeks.
You can start trying to conceive again after this period, but you may want to wait longer so that you have more time to recover physically and emotionally. (You'll need to use birth control to prevent conception during this time, because you may ovulate as early as two weeks after you miscarry.)
## How to cope after a miscarriage.
Though you may be physically ready to get pregnant again, you may not feel ready emotionally. Some women cope best by turning their attention toward trying for a new pregnancy as soon as possible. Others find that months or more go by before they're ready to try to conceive again. Take the time to examine your feelings, and do what feels right for you and your partner. For more information see our article on coping with pregnancy loss.
You may find help in a support group (your caregiver can refer you to one) or in our Community's Miscarriage, Stillbirth, and Infant Loss Support group.
If you're feeling overwhelmed by your sadness, call your caregiver. They can put you in touch with a therapist who can help.
If you're wondering how to explain a pregnancy loss to your child, read about how to talk to your preschooler about pregnancy loss.


# Understanding early miscarriage.
Miscarriages that happen in the first trimester are called early miscarriages. Sadly, they’re more common than you might think – most miscarriages happen in these first few weeks of pregnancy. Many miscarriages start with symptoms like bleeding and cramping but sometimes they are only discovered during a routine ultrasound scan. No matter when miscarriage happens, losing your baby is very distressing. Find out what to do if you spot any symptoms and how to get the help and support you need if you experience early pregnancy loss.
## What is early miscarriage?.
An early miscarriage is the loss of a pregnancy in the first 12 weeks. Sadly, early miscarriages are very common. Most miscarriages happen in the first 12 weeks of pregnancy. It’s possible to have a miscarriage before you even realise you’re pregnant. It’s thought that around one in three of all fertilised eggs are lost in the earliest days of pregnancy, before a pregnancy test has been done.  And experts believe that about one in five confirmed pregnancies will end in miscarriage.  Miscarriage at any stage of pregnancy is a terrible blow and it’s only natural that you feel shocked and distressed. Don’t feel you can’t grieve over your loss. 
## What causes early miscarriage? .
Early miscarriages usually happen because your embryo doesn’t develop as it should. They usually happen for no clear reason and in most cases, they are unlikely to happen again. But genetic problems are thought to be the most common cause, which are more likely if you’re aged over 35 years.  Chromosomal abnormalities can prevent a baby from developing. A baby usually has 23 chromosomes from their mother and 23 from their father. But variations may happen because there are too many or too few chromosomes, or because there are changes to a chromosome’s structure.  Sadly, almost all pregnancies with chromosomal problems end in miscarriage.
## What are the signs and symptoms of an early miscarriage? .
The most common signs and symptoms of a miscarriage are vaginal bleeding and strong period-type cramps.  The bleeding can vary from light to heavy, perhaps with blood clots, and may come and go for a few days.  Sometimes, women have these symptoms but then they settle down and the pregnancy usually carries on. This is called a threatened miscarriage. There is some, very limited evidence that treatment with hormone-like medications called progestogens may stop a threatened miscarriage from happening. With any bleeding or abdominal pain in early pregnancy, call your doctor, or your hospital’s early pregnancy unit (EPU) or out-of-hours service. You’ll find more advice and support in our article about what to do if you think you’re having a miscarriage. Sometimes you may not have any noticeable symptoms and your early miscarriage is discovered only during a routine pregnancy scan, which can come as a massive shock. A scan may reveal an empty pregnancy sac, where the embryo should be. Sometimes the embryo is still there but has stopped developing. This is called a missed miscarriage or silent miscarriage. 
##  What will happen next after my early miscarriage?.
In most cases, the miscarriage will take its course naturally. If this happens to you, you won’t usually need further treatment. The bleeding is likely to tail off in a week to 10 days and will usually have stopped after two weeks or three weeks. You’ll be able to rest at home with painkillers and a hot water bottle, and, most important of all, someone to comfort and take care of you.  Your doctor may ask you to do a pregnancy test at home after your miscarriage, to confirm that the pregnancy has ended. Or they may recommend you have blood tests called Beta-hCG, which measure the amount of a pregnancy hormone called human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) in your blood. Dramatically decreasing levels can be a sign that you are having a miscarriage.  Depending on your stage of pregnancy or if you are still experiencing symptoms, you may be offered a follow-up appointment after the miscarriage. This is to check that your body is recovering as it should.  You may be referred to an early pregnancy unit (EPU) if there’s one near you. There are more than 200 EPUs in the UK, so there’s a good chance you’ll have access to one.  At the EPU, you may be offered an ultrasound scan and other tests such as blood tests to confirm that the pregnancy has ended.
##  What is an incomplete miscarriage? .
If the bleeding doesn’t tail off or stop after two weeks or so, you may need extra care. The bleeding may mean there are some pregnancy tissues left in your womb (uterus). This is called an incomplete miscarriage and may need treatment.  Your doctors are likely to advise one of the following approaches:
### Expectant management.
The bleeding is given up to a week more to settle, without treatment, as long as there’s no sign of infection. If you experience symptoms, such as very heavy bleeding, a high temperature (fever) or severe pain, contact your hospital immediately as they may show that you have an infection. If this does happen, you may be advised to have surgery to remove any remaining pregnancy tissue.
### Medical management.
 Your doctor will give you medicines to help along completion of the miscarriage. You may be offered tablets to swallow or a pessary to insert into your vagina. The bleeding after medical management can be heavy and take longer to stop. But it will mean you don’t have to have surgery, and you should only have to stay in hospital for a short while after your treatment.
### Surgical management.
Your doctor will perform a minor operation. Doctors call this an SMM, which stands for surgical management of miscarriage.  An SMM takes a few minutes and you’re likely to recover quickly. It’s most likely that your doctor will carry out the procedure while you’re asleep under a general anaesthetic.  Some hospitals offer the option of surgical management with a local anaesthetic, instead of a general. This procedure is called MVA, which stands for manual vacuum aspiration.  One advantage of surgical management is that bleeding usually stops a little more quickly afterwards, which may help to ease your distress. It also means there is less chance you’ll have to go back into hospital for further treatment.  SMM works effectively and in most cases no further treatment is needed. Your doctor is particularly likely to recommend SMM if you have heavy bleeding or signs of infection. 
## How will I know which treatment option is right for me? .
Deciding whether or not to have treatment and which option to go for is a highly personal decision. Most women prefer to let nature take its course, even if it means they may need treatment later. Others want the experience of miscarriage to be over as soon as possible.  Your doctor should explain all the options so that you have the information you need before you decide what to do. To help you, your doctor should make it clear if they think one course of treatment is better for your health than another. Your chances of having a healthy pregnancy next time round are equally good, whichever option you choose. Unless you need emergency healthcare, your doctor should give you time to make your choice. 
## Will I be able to find out what went wrong? .
You may be surprised that your doctor doesn’t arrange for you to have any special tests after a first miscarriage. But this is because serious medical problems aren’t usually the cause of an early miscarriage. Most early miscarriages are one-off, so it is very likely that your next pregnancy will be a successful one. So you’re unlikely to be given a follow-up appointment to see a consultant unless you’ve had three miscarriages in a row (recurrent miscarriage).
## I’m finding it hard to get over my miscarriage. Where can I get help?.
Miscarriage can be traumatic because it takes away all the hopes and dreams that a positive pregnancy test brings. The experience can leave you with overwhelming feelings of loss and grief.  Losing a baby can be tragic no matter how early in pregnancy it happens, and you will need to allow yourself a chance to recover and grieve.  Honouring the baby you've lost is one way to help you cope with your grief. Here are some ways to remember a baby you've lost in pregnancy. In time, you will be able to look to the future again. When you’re ready to think about trying again, it may be some comfort to know that most women go on to have a successful future pregnancy. You may wish to contact the Miscarriage AssociationOpens a new window or counselling service at your local hospital for help. You may wish to have a memorial for your baby or write in a book of remembrance at your hospital. Some parents say that they found this helpful as a way of saying goodbye to their baby. Read tips on how to cope with worries about miscarriage from BabyCentre parents. You’ll also find plenty of support in BabyCentre’s communityOpens a new window from other families who have experienced loss.